(i) A high consistency between the different types of genetic and non-genetic manipulations in their effects on bleomycin-induced lung fibrosis. When the same manipulation was used in different studies or different manipulations were used in the same study, the consistency between results supports their reliability. In interpreting and evaluating these results, it should be considered that the list of PFRGs relies mostly on studies that employ loss-of-function interventions (Table 1) and thus might cover only a part of the molecular mechanisms involved in fibrosis. Still, even if the collected PFRGs do not encompass the whole picture of fibrosis, they seem to provide a coherent image as they form a highly interconnected PPI network.

Another important point is that PFRGs might be involved in a more general response, i.e. tissue repair after injury. In particular, we compared PFRGs with skin wound healing-related genes 15 and found a significant overlap of over 20% (p < 0.001). This observation suggests that fibrosis and wound healing have much in common and that PFRGs are not exclusively associated with lung fibrosis but rather many of them are involved in a more general response. Yet, it seems the relationship between these processes is more complex than a simple "accelerated/slower wound healing-reduced/promoted fibrosis". These relationships are an excellent point for future investigations.

(ii) PFRGs are overall enriched for regulation of cellular proliferation, inflammation and immune functions, and aging-related processes, with a prominent difference between anti-and pro-fibrotic genes. That is, when pro-and anti-fibrotic genes were analyzed separately, they displayed definite enrichment patterns that were distinct from one another. We found that the pro-fibrotic genes are dominated by positive regulation of cellular proliferation, inflammatory processes and immune responses, including related processes and pathways such as Cytokine signaling, Jak-STAT signaling pathway, TNF signaling pathway, or Reaction to pathogen. These findings are not unexpected when considering that fibrosis is a wound healing response gone awry, which would most likely be the case for fibrosis of any tissue. The above indirectly highlights the role of immunity and inflammatory responses in the induction and development of pulmonary fibrosis 9 , a conclusion that is also supported by the results of our functional module analysis. Remarkably, pro-fibrotic genes are specifically enriched in processes and pathways closely linked to aging, such as the insulin-FoxO signaling pathway 26 , PI3K-Akt signaling pathway 22 , etc. Not surprisingly, PFRGs and particularly profibrotic genes are enriched for the Oxygen homeostasis and Stress response categories.

This is in line with our previous finding of high resistance to oxidative-stress-induced cytotoxicity in lung fibroblasts from IPF patients 27 . Huang et al. 28 have also shown that fibroblasts from the lungs of bleomycin-treated old mice, displayed a stronger fibrotic response and were more resistant to H 2 O 2 -induced apoptosis than those from the young. In the long run, this may result in the accumulation of damaged/senescent cells that would otherwise be eliminated, as was actually observed in vivo by Hecker et al. 29 . In that regard, we were surprised to find that cellular senescence per se was not one of the terms found in the enrichment analysis. However, many of the pathways that we found can potentially converge to it (e.g. regulation of proliferation, cancer, inflammation, response to stress, etc. ), thus supporting the idea that cellular senescence may indeed play an important role in lung fibrosis 6,27,30,31 . The results of enrichment analysis are further strengthened by the functional module network analysis in which at least two modules are enriched for processes related to the response to oxidative stress and hypoxia (see Fig. 3 and Supplementary Table ST5). This could be specifically relevant to lung vs other tissues, because of the high oxygen environment 32,33 . In contrast to pro-fibrotic genes, anti-fibrotic genes were found to be enriched for negative regulation of cell proliferation, MAPK signaling pathway and response to mechanical stimulus.

Of note, the lungs experience ongoing mechanical stress and areas with a higher pressure are more prone to fibrotic changes 34 . With this in mind, our previous finding of actin-organization aberrations in IPF fibroblasts 27 may highlight the critical role of the response to mechanical stress in lung integrity and functionality. Interestingly, PFRGs are most likely to be expressed in immune cells and connective tissues cells, pro-fibrotic genes being mainly associated with immune cells, whereas anti-fibrotic genes with connective tissues, pulmonary vascular smooth muscle and endothelial cells (Fig. 2). (iii) The high consistency between the expression of PFRGs in the mouse model of bleomycin-induced lung fibrosis and the expression of their human orthologs in the lungs of IPF patients indicates that, despite its disadvantages 11,12 , the bleomycin model is still highly relevant for the study of human lung fibrosis 10,25,35 .

In particular, the human orthologs of murine PFRGs could be the targets for therapeutic interventions. To some extent, it is also supported by our findings that PFRGs are highly conserved among vertebrates but much less in invertebrate species. This implies that many PFRGs are a relatively recent acquisition in the course of evolution and that the genetic basis of pulmonary fibrosis may have a common platform among vertebrates. Yet, the targets for manipulation might have been, to some extent, selected a priori based on indications for their potential involvement in IPF. If so, it may cause a bias for the PFRG list. (iv) Our network-based analysis clearly showed that PFRGs are highly interconnected and hence interacting, thus significantly reducing the odds to treat pulmonary fibrosis by targeting a single gene 36 . In other words, it means that a multi-target therapy approach would definitely be preferable. (v) Comparing the mouse PFRGs and longevity-associated genes (LAGs) brought another remarkable finding:

pro-longevity genes are dominated by anti-fibrotic genes, whereas the anti-longevity genes are dominated by pro-fibrotic genes. Congruent with this finding is the observation that the functional modules for antifibrotic genes contain pro-LAGs but no anti-LAGs (Fig. 3b). Conversely, the modules for pro-fibrotic genes www.nature.com/scientificreports/ include mostly anti-LAGs (Fig. 3c). That is, the anti-fibrotic genes are associated with lifespan extension while the pro-fibrotic ones are associated with premature aging. Both findings support the notion that pulmonary fibrosis is a disease of aging. It would be worth mentioning that many age-related processes are linked to signaling pathways crucially involved in organ regeneration/repair (though on various levels of the metabolic hierarchy) 37 . They concern structural and functional differentiation as well as de-differentiation of organ tissue, chronic inflammation, and energy supply (or more precisely, its depletion). However, at this point, we should still keep in mind that our analysis predominantly represents pulmonary fibrosis induced by bleomycin and does not necessarily reflect (in both quality and quantity) the entirety of the most frequent and threatening form of age-related human lung fibrosis, IPF. In addition, it is difficult to assess the "chicken and egg" dilemma at this point.

That is, we cannot definitely state whether manipulation of these genes affects fibrosis primarily, which in turn drives tissue aging, or the more likely case, that these genes are integral to important processes that affect both aging and fibrosis in parallel.

It should be noted that the vast majority of the bleomycin studies were done using young mice, whereas the logic of lung fibrosis, and in particular IPF, requires including aged animals in the study. Thus far, these studies are sporadic. As an example, young WT and Zmpste24-deficient progeroid mice developed a similar fibrotic response to BLM. In contrast, old WT mice but not old Zmpste24-deficient mice developed severe lung fibrosis 38 . Unexpected protection of Zmpste24-null old lungs against BLM was apparently attributed to the upregulation of several extracellular matrix-related miRNAs (miR23a, 27a, 29a, 145a), thus resulting in downregulation of targeted profibrotic pathways of TGF-β/SMAD3/NF-κB and Wnt3a/β-catenin signaling axes. Of note, similar age-dependent responses were observed when the rate of skin wound healing was investigated in longevity/ premature-aging phenotypes 15,39,40 . Nevertheless, the mouse BML model, even when used in young animals alone, appears to be a valuable tool for investigating lung fibrosis.

Finally, we would like to stress again that, based on our analysis, a multi-target therapy of pulmonary fibrosis should become the major strategy. Furthermore, although the collected list of PFRGs is quite extensive, the application of novel techniques, such as CRISPR and modified RNA, would be an important point for future investigations. It is also worthwhile to extend the experimental studies by including aged animals.

Methods