Overlap between aging-related genes and age-related diseases with publication bias correction The overlap analysis between aging-related genes and ARD genes was repeated after applying a filter for PBC (i.e., only containing genes with at least 10 publications). After PBC, the human aging-related gene set presents a significant overlap with ARD from all classes except for the immune system class (Fig. 2B). For the human homologs of aging-related genes from model organisms, only the mouse and the Drosophila present significant overlaps with ARDs and the latter only presents significant results for the anti-longevity gene set. In the mouse, pro-longevity genes have a higher number of ARDs overlapping compared to anti-longevity genes. In the all orthologs gene set, both anti-and pro-longevity genes show an association with the neoplasms class. These results are supported by P-values in Supplementary Materials, Tables S8 and S9, also suggesting a general stronger overlap with aging of genes associated with neoplasms and nutritional and metabolic diseases.

Comparing the two analyses without and with PBC, respectively, Figure 2A and B, we observe a decrease in the number of significant overlapping ARDs with all aging-related gene sets due to the exclusion of less studied genes. The human aging gene set is the least affected by the exclusion of less studied genes since after PBC it presents only a loss of 16% of its genes (298 to 253 genes). Small reductions are verified in small gene sets, such as the baker's yeast and the mouse. The opposite is verified in bigger gene sets, such as worms, which lose 47% and 50% of genes in anti-and pro-longevity sets, respectively. Finally, these same patterns are observed comparing Supplementary Materials, Tables S6-S9, which show statistical tests for the various overlaps. Overlap between aging-related genes and age-related diseases in the interactome The interactome (15000 genes) is a subset of the genome (20183 genes) within which only genes for which protein-protein interaction data is available are present (Table 1). We assessed the overlap between aging and ARDs genes when restricting the analysis to genes in the human interactome (Supplementary Material, Fig. S3). The distribution of aging-related gene overlaps with ARDs is similar in the interactome (Supplementary Material, Fig. S3) to the distribution in the whole genome ( Fig. 2A), both without and with PBC.

The analyses present similarities in the total number of genes, the overlap significance (P-values), the number of CAD-genes, and the relations between age-related diseases and aging shown by the anti-and pro-longevity sets.

When comparing the whole genome and the interactome analyses without PBC (Supplementary Materials, Tables S6, S7, S10 and S11) and the whole genome and the interactome analyses with PBC (Supplementary Materials, Tables S8, S9, S12 and S13), there is a slight drop in the significance of overlaps with PBC, suggesting that some (but not all) results are indeed due to publication bias. Looking at the effect of PBC on the number of CAD-genes, there is again a slight decrease with PBC in the majority of ARD classes and individual diseases. We conclude that publication bias has a modest but noticeable effect on our results.

Since genes function in combination with other genes, studying genes and proteins as part of interaction networks is essential (21). To study the effect of genes which interact with agingrelated genes in the links between aging and ARDs, we performed an analysis in which aging gene sets were composed of gene sets from the genome with PBC plus the genes directly connected to them (first order partners). This analysis revealed that aging-related gene sets including the first order partners are 18 to 51 times larger than the original aging-related gene sets with PBC (Fig. 4A). This increase in the number of genes is not proportional to the initial gene set size, and human aging-related genes are the ones that interact more with other genes.

Regarding ARDs classes overlapping with aging-related genes, neoplasms and nervous system classes do so in all gene sets analysed. Cardiovascular, as well nutritional and metabolic classes are also present. Musculoskeletal diseases overlap with human aging-related genes and then they only overlap with anti-longevity genes of mice and Drosophila. Finally, respiratory tract diseases present a significant overlap with aging for the anti-longevity gene set in C. elegans.

Overall, there is a clear increase in the number of overlapping ARD genes with aging-related genes by including first order interaction partners, as well as in the number of CAD-genes, which is supported by a statistical significance analysis (Supplementary Materials, Tables S14 and S15). Given the large increase in the number of genes by including first order partners, these results are not surprising but they underscore the large interconnection of biological networks, including between aging and age-related diseases.

Co

expression network analysis

Co-expression networks offer a complementary perspective on biological interactions from protein-protein interaction networks. To study co-expression, data were downloaded from the GeneFriends database (22) and genes co-expressed with agingrelated genes (human candidate genes plus human homologs of genes associated with aging in model organisms, all following PBC) were considered (see Materials and Methods). The inclusion of genes co-expressed with aging-related genes again changes the number of genes per set; and there is an increase which is proportional to the size of the initial set, i.e., larger sets have a greater increase in their sizes (Fig. 4B).

At the level of age-related disease classes, neoplasms is the main class with a significant overlap between aging-related genes and ARDs genes, followed by the cardiovascular and nervous system classes. As before, the human aging-related gene set shows the highest association with ARDs. Immune system disease genes seem associated with aging-related genes when considering the anti-longevity genes of all orthologs together. Interestingly, there is a difference in overlapping classes between anti-and prolongevity gene sets and, except in the mouse, anti-longevity genes  . The y-axis quantifies the number of age-related diseases which significantly overlap with aging-related genes; the x-axis describes the aging-related gene sets studied according to the source organism (i.e., human plus human homologs of aging-related genes from each model organism). The columns have seven different colours to represent each age-related disease classe analysed: Neoplasms (light blue), Nutritional and Metabolic diseases (orange), Nervous System diseases (light grey), Cardiovascular diseases (yellow), Musculoskeletal diseases (blue), Respiratory Tract diseases (green) and Immune System diseases (dark blue). The first column represents the number of age-related diseases with a significant overlap with candidate human aging-associated genes. Model organisms are ordered by evolutionary proximity to humans. This analysis was performed with PBC.

The secondary y-axis displays the number of genes from the respective gene sets. (A) shows the number of significant overlapping aging-related genes with age-related diseases, including first order interaction partners. The interactome plus aging-related and age-related disease genes was considered as background. (B) shows the number of significant overlapping aging-related genes with age-related diseases, including co-expressed genes. The genome was considered as background. present a higher relation to ARDs than pro-longevity genes, which is very clear in flies and worms (Fig. 5).

In the mouse, the results show that pro-longevity genes slightly overlap with nervous system disease genes, but the association is verified due to just one disease. In Drosophila, antilongevity genes are associated with nutritional and metabolic, cardiovascular and respiratory tract diseases, while the prolongevity genes are associated only with nervous system diseases. Finally, there is no significant overlap with any age-related diseases in the pro-longevity gene set of worms, even though it contains more than two thousand genes. Moreover, there are a few CAD-genes (up to 15) which show non-significant overlaps with the assessed ARDs (Supplementary Materials, Tables S16 and S17).

Because including co-expressed genes increases the number of starting genes, there is an increase in the number of CAD-genes when including co-expressed genes. Using the human agingrelated gene set as an example, there are 65 CAD-genes in the overlap with neoplasms genes but when including the co-expressed genes the overlap with neoplasms increases to 131 CAD-genes. However, the percentage of overlapping genes drops dramatically. For human aging-related genes, 22% and 0.06% are associated with ARDs, with and without co-expressed genes, respectively.

Properties of common genes between aging and age-related diseases

Common genes or CAD-genes from the overlap analyses can highlight clues about pathways which link aging to disease processes. CAD-genes were obtained from the overlap between the human aging set and ARDs genes from analyses per individual age-related diseases or per diseases class, both with PBC.