A small subset of aging-related genes are also associated with agerelated diseases The number of times that each CAD-gene overlaps with ARDs was defined as its frequency, and allows us to determine if some genes are involved in several disease processes. Figure 6A shows the frequency of CAD-genes across all the age-related disease classes. A total of 94 genes were obtained from the overlap between the human aging-related genes and all the ARDs genes per class. A majority of these genes (approx. 83% genes) overlap with up to three classes (Fig. 6A). Regarding genes which overlap with a great number of classes, PON1 and APOE are at the top (Fig. 6B), as well as some other genes involved in agerelated changes, for example, VEGFA, IL6 and AR. One gene present in all ARDs analysed is TNF (tumour necrosis factor).

It is also interesting to explore aging-related genes which are not associated with any ARDs. The 94 CAD genes represent 37% of the human aging-related genes with PBC (253 genes), which means that most (63%) aging-related genes are not associated with any ARD class. From the perspective of ARDs genes (639 genes), about 15% have been related to human aging.

An analysis of the CAD-genes distribution was also performed by individual ARDs. A total of 90 genes were found to overlap between human aging-related genes and ARD genes. Figure 7A shows that the number of genes involved in several ARDs is small, and about 59% (53 genes) of the 90 genes are associated with up to three ARDs. The pattern of distribution is similar to the analysis by ARD class and TNF, PON1, APOE and VEGFA are the top of CAD-genes among ARDs for both analyses (per age-related disease class and per individual disease) (Fig. 7B). In this analysis, the percentage of aging-related genes not associated with any age-related disease is about 64%. Similar to above, from the perspective of ARD genes (596 genes), only 15% have been related to human aging.

Pathways and processes linking aging and age-related diseases A functional enrichment analysis was performed on CADgenes. The background used was the set of human agingrelated genes plus ARDs sets. Functional enrichment for CADgenes from all analysed ARD classes shows that these genes are Figure 5. Overlapping aging-related genes and their co-expressed partners with age-related diseases for various classes and organisms. Green means there is at least one age-related disease from that class that significantly overlaps with aging-related genes and red means no association. Model organisms are in descending order of their proximity to humans. This analysis was performed without PBC. associated with: negative regulation of apoptosis, cell cycle, positive regulation of DNA, positive regulation of protein metabolic process and response to stimuli (Supplementary Material, Table S1).

Looking at CAD-genes in individual ARDs, only neoplasms, nutritional and metabolic, musculoskeletal and eye classes have significant functional clusters. Relative to neoplasms, CAD-genes are more associated with negative regulation of apoptosis, DNA repair, regulation of cell cycle and cancer, which is in line with cancer aetiology and its relationship to aging (17). CADgenes from the nutritional and metabolic class are related to response to insulin stimulus and positive regulation of lipid process, while CAD-genes for musculoskeletal diseases only show an association with the extracellular region. Finally, eye diseases CAD-genes seem to be associated with positive regulation of RNA metabolic process (Supplementary Material, Table S1).

Increased network connectivity in genes common to aging and agerelated diseases Network approaches consider as a measure of node (gene) relevance the node's degree, which represents the number of connections of each node. This measure helps to define hubs, which in general are deemed essential nodes with many connections. To understand if CAD-genes are likely to be hubs, a comparison between the degree of CAD-genes and ARD genes or aging-related genes (the non-common genes) was made using protein-protein interaction data (Supplementary Material, Table S2). Age-related disease class analysis shows significant differences in node degree between CAD-genes and controls (P-value < 0.001). The median node degree of CAD-genes (47) is substantially higher than the median for the control set (11). Looking at ARD classes, only two classes have a significant (P < 0.05) difference between the two sets investigated: neoplasms and immune system diseases. Neoplasms present a higher median for CAD-genes (47) compared to the control set (23.5), while for the immune system class the opposite is verified (8.5 vs 43) (Supplementary Material, Table S2).

The results from the analysis per individual ARDs show a significant difference in the number of node connections for four diseases: atherosclerosis (P ¼ 0.002), breast neoplasm (P ¼ 0.020), hypersensitivity (P ¼ 0.019) and osteoporosis (P ¼ 0.039). Except for breast neoplasm, the median for CADgenes is lower when compared to the ARD genes (Supplementary Material, Table S2).

Processes associated with aging-related genes not associated with age-related diseases A functional enrichment was performed for genes from the human aging gene set which are not associated with any ARD. The main processes in the functional enrichment are: response to DNA damage, negative regulation of apoptosis, ATP-binding, negative regulation of transcription, DNA repair, aging, telomere maintenance, response to several stimuli, negative regulation of gene expression, cancer and signalling pathways (for examples, insulin, IL3 and MAPKinase). Of these terms, the ones with the higher cluster scores are response to DNA damage and negative regulation of apoptosis. The full list of significantly enriched terms is in Supplementary Material, Table S3.

Molecular evolutionary rates of aging-and diseaserelated genes

Aging-related and disease-related genes are also known to differ from the genome-wide average at the level of selection pressures. The study this, the dN/dS ratio between humans and mice of the human aging-related genes and the ARD genes sets was analysed and compared to the remaining genome (see Materials and Methods). Results show a significant (p < 0.001) difference between ARD genes and the other genes in the genome, wherein ARD genes have a higher median dN/dS ratio (0.137) than the whole genome (0.091). Although there was a difference between aging (median of 0.079) and non-aging genes (median of 0.093), this was not statistically significant (pvalue ¼ 0.155).

The dN/dS ratio was also assessed in anti-and pro-longevity genes. A difference in dN/dS ratio between anti-and prolongevity genes was only observed in C. elegans (p-value ¼ 0.046, which is not significant after Bonferroni correction), so we find no evidence of differences in molecular evolution rates between anti-and pro-longevity genes.

Searching for patterns and features which could define CADgenes, their molecular evolutionary (dN/dS) rate was analysed in comparison with aging-related genes and ARD genes. The CAD-genes used were from the overlaps of the three ARD classes with more genes: all classes together, neoplasms and nutritional and metabolic diseases. No statistically significant differences were found, suggesting that molecular evolution rates of CAD-genes are not different from other aging and ARD genes.

Drugs predicted from aging-related gene interactions with drugs

Given the large number of aging-related genes and pathways identified, there is great interest in identifying drugs that target them and may potentially have clinical benefits (23). To obtain candidate drugs affecting the aging process, we employed publicly available drug-gene interaction data (see Materials and Methods). In total, 376 drugs whose targets overlapped with aging-related genes were obtained. Twenty statisticallysignificant drugs that have more interactions with aging-related genes than expected by chance were obtained after Bonferroni correction (Supplementary Material, Table S4).

The majority of the drugs obtained from this analysis were histone deacetylase inhibitors used for the treatment of cancer. This might be due to an overrepresentation of cancer drugs in public databases. Nonetheless, three known lifespan-extending drugs were identified: sodium phenylbutyrate, valproic acid and everolimus (Supplementary Material, Table S4). The fact that experimentally validated aging-related drugs are detected by our methodology suggests that this approach may be useful to identify new candidate drugs with effects on aging.

Discussion

To our knowledge, ours is the largest analysis of the gerontome to date, and the first to consider pro-and anti-longevity genes in a systematic fashion. We first characterized functions and pathways overrepresented in pro-and anti-longevity genes. Major anti-longevity pathways and processes include insulin signalling, growth hormone signalling and mTOR signalling. Key pro-longevity pathways include p53, cell cycle and autophagy. Although such pathways and processes are known to be related to aging (2,4,5,24), it is interesting that they are classified as anti-and pro-longevity in our systematic analysis of the genetics of aging. Differentiation between anti-longevity and prolongevity genes and processes can provide additional clues about aging-related processes and can help identify other genes with a similar effect on aging.