Functional analysis of SMs and their targets revealed that they are distributed between three major categories: epigenetics, intra-and inter-cellular signaling, and metabolic "switchers". All these categories appear to be mandatorily presented in each SM cocktail to induce cell reprogramming. Specifically, it seems that sufficient components for a "minimal reprogramming" cocktail have to include an inhibitor of HDAC (e.g. VPA or NaB), an inhibitor of TGFβ signaling (e.g. RepSox), and GSK3-inhibiting SMs (e.g. CHIR99021 or LiCl). This assumption was further confirmed by the KEGG pathways enrichment analysis. The unusually significant enrichment of epigenetic and signaling pathways highlights their importance in chemical iP. Remarkably, many enriched pathways were related to aging, longevity and age-related diseases, thus presumably connecting them with the processes of cell reprogramming. This notion has recently been supported experimentally by demonstrating induction of cellular senescence by activation of OSKM, in vitro [37] and also in vivo on i4F reprogrammable mice [38][39][40]. Yet, this does not minimize the potential importance of pathways that are only slightly enriched or are not enriched at all.

For example, Glycolysis/Gluconeogenesis pathway appears in our analysis as a marginally significantly enriched pathway (p = 0.051), although it is a well-recognized metabolic pathway for cell reprogramming; moreover, it is well known that the pluripotent stem cells rely on glycolysis rather than OXPHOS (reviewed by [3]). The possible explanation for this result is most likely related to the small number of glycolytic enzymes among the SM targets, relative to the total number of targets. Further strengthening the importance of metabolic components of iP is the observation that the HIF-1 signaling pathway is among the most significantly enriched pathways (fold AGING  20). Indeed, the hypoxiainducible factor 1 alpha (Hif1alpha) activates glycolysis and concomitantly promotes telomerase expression and enhances self-renewal of stem cells [41]. Another important observation is that the main transcription factors of pluripotency, Oct4 and Nanog, can directly induce expression of the key glycolytic enzymes hexokinase 2 and pyruvate kinase M2, thus delaying differentiation and preserving pluripotency of ESCs [42].

In turn, the genes involved in the control of glucose uptake (GLUT3) and metabolism (PKM2) are also involved in the regulation of Oct4 expression [43]. For unclear reasons, some promising SMs have not been used in reprogramming cocktails developed thus far. For example, vitamin C (see Table 3 and Supplementary  Tables 1, 5) was shown to modulate the TET enzymes, which promotes demethylation of histones and DNA, with subsequent enhancing cell reprogramming induced AGING by OSKM [44][45][46], however it was not yet evaluated in combination with any SM cocktail.

It is still a matter of debate whether SMs act independently of each other in triggering cell reprogramming, or if they act in a cooperative, epistatic manner. The latter suggests the interactions between their targets, including direct (physical) interactions. With this in mind, we analyzed the connectivity and interconnectivity of targets of SMs and SM cocktails. The network analysis indicates that their targets are highly interconnected and form PPI networks with a scale-free topology that confers robustness and persistent connectivity. This means that: (i) the SM targets probably act in a cooperative manner to induce cell reprogramming; (ii) a scale-free topology of SM targets ensures higher integrity of the network and its resistance to random attacks [47,48], thus making the cell reprogramming process highly reliable.

Recently, we hypothesized that cell reprogramming is a natural process that is triggered and regulated via two major networksa genetic one (triggered by transcription factors, e.g. OSKM) and a chemical one (controlled by metabolites, e.g. similar to SMs) [3,49].

In line with this hypothesis are our data demonstrating that: (i) a large number of SMs (28 of 92; Table 3) used for cell reprogramming are found in the human metabolome (derivatives of nucleotides, fatty acids, etc. ), and (ii) many more metabolites (over 200) are functionally similar to SMs, thus offering the potential of being cell reprogramming agents. In addition to the chemical factors, environmental factors such as hypoxia and/or hypercapnia (which eventually act as chemical factors, namely through low concentrations of oxygen and high concentrations of carbon dioxide) may greatly influence the cell dedifferentiation process [3,50]. It should be mentioned again (see above) that hypoxic/hypercapnic microenvironment associated with a low reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation and activation of glycolysis, is essential for maintenance and proper functioning of dedifferentiated cells.

Further supporting our hypothesis are the data on the common targets of SM cocktails and Yamanaka's factors. This comparison revealed an insignificant overlap between the SM cocktails' targets and OSKM, except for Cocktail #7. The lack of common targets between the cocktails and Yamanaka factors was quite a surprising observation. More prominent overlap was however observed between pathways, meaning that despite different targets, both SM cocktails and Yamanaka's factors "use" more or less the same pathways.

Altogether, this suggests that the two systems, chemical (SMs) and genetic (TFs), might cooperate to increase the efficiency of cell reprogramming. Interestingly, the overlapping pathways for SM cocktails and OSKM targets are mainly cancer-or virus-related but not related to key reprogramming processes, such as demethylation and chromatin decondensation or pluripotency pathways, as it might be expected. One of the reasons could be rooted in statistical issues. In Table  2, only the pathways significantly overlapping with at least one SM cocktail, are presented. Another important point is that cancer-related pathways are not "purely" cancer pathways, but include many components related to cell division and reprogramming. For example, Wnt/β-catenin and MAPK signaling pathways are known for their role in cell dedifferentiation [51,52]. These pathways are also well known for their involvement in carcinogenesis [53].

Although beyond the scope of the present study, it is worth mentioning that there is a significant overlap between the collected 92 SMs and the compounds found in the DrugAge database [54] (n = 20 drugs; p = 4.95E-15). Among the common drugs are Rapamycin, Valproic acid, Caffeic acid, and Lithium chloride. Similarly, there is a large overlap between the SM targets and the longevity-associated genes (LAGs) hosted in the GenAge database [55] (n = 132, p = 3E-88 for human LAGs and n = 136, p = 5E-24 for human orthologs of model organism LAGs). Lastly, SM targets also overlap with the list of genes related to cellular senescence (CS) from the CellAge database [2] (n = 85, p = 1E-42). As a point for further investigation is testing the established or newly constructed SM cocktails in vivo. In this regard, testing SM cocktails in the naked mole-rat model could be of particular interest as induction of pluripotency in the cells of this animal requires special conditions and is not always achievable [56][57][58].

All in all, SMs and their relationship with TFs definitely warrants further investigation which could probably shed more light on the mechanisms of cell reprogramming and will be helpful for developing the most optimal SM cocktails with effects on CS, aging and longevity.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Data sources

Data

AGING

HMDB contains the collection of small molecules found in the human body, including nucleic acids, carbohydrates, lipids, peptides, amino acids, organic acids, biogenic amines, vitamins, minerals, food additives, drugs, cosmetics, contaminants, pollutants, and other chemicals that enter the human body [24].

Data mining and organization

The papers were searched using the following keywords: "induced pluripotency", "chemically induced pluripotency", "chemical reprogramming", "chemically induced dedifferentiation", "induction of pluripotency by small molecules". In order to be included in the analysis, each article had to contain data: (i) on SM(s) or their cocktail(s) that either induced or enhanced cellular reprogramming; (ii) on the bioactivity of the SMs; and (iii) on the SM dosage and cell type. According to their role in cell reprogramming, the compounds found were divided into two major groups of molecules: iP inducers and iP enhancers. Since it was not always possible to definitely link the compounds to one of the groups, as in some cases a given compound was considered an inducer and in other cases an enhancer, these entities were marked as "inducer and/or enhancer". From each paper the following data were collected and manually curated: (i) the name(s) of SM(s) that either induce or enhance pluripotency, with or without TFs; (ii) the effect of SM(s) on the iP efficiency; and (iii) whether a given SM can substitute the pluripotency-associated TFs. The collected SMs were organized in a table as shown in Supplementary Tables 1, 6. The data regarding each compound included: common name, formula, molecular weight (MW), main bioactivity/target(s), comments relevant to cellular reprogramming, link to PubChem references, PMID.

Only the SM cocktails which induced cell reprogramming (not necessary to the stage of iPSCs) without TFs were included in the analysis.

Drug

protein interaction network