A multidimensional systems biology analysis of cellular senescence in aging and disease

Roberto A Avelar † Javier Gómez Ortega Robi Tacutu Eleanor J Tyler Dominic Bennett Paolo Binetti Arie Budovsky Kasit Chatsirisupachai Emily Johnson Alex Murray Samuel Shields Daniela Tejada-Martinez Daniel Thornton Vadim E Fraifeld Cleo L Bishop João Pedro De Magalhães A multidimensional systems biology analysis of cellular senescence in aging and disease 10.1186/s13059-020-01990-9R E S E A R C H Open Access Background: Cellular senescence, a permanent state of replicative arrest in otherwise proliferating cells, is a hallmark of aging and has been linked to aging-related diseases. Many genes play a role in cellular senescence, yet a comprehensive understanding of its pathways is still lacking.Results: We develop CellAge (http://genomics.senescence.info/cells), a manually curated database of 279 human genes driving cellular senescence, and perform various integrative analyses. Genes inducing cellular senescence tend to be overexpressed with age in human tissues and are significantly overrepresented in anti-longevity and tumor-suppressor genes, while genes inhibiting cellular senescence overlap with pro-longevity and oncogenes. Furthermore, cellular senescence genes are strongly conserved in mammals but not in invertebrates. We also build cellular senescence protein-protein interaction and co-expression networks. Clusters in the networks are enriched for cell cycle and immunological processes.

Network topological parameters also reveal novel potential cellular senescence regulators. Using siRNAs, we observe that all 26 candidates tested induce at least one marker of senescence with 13 genes (C9orf40, CDC25A, CDCA4, CKAP2, GTF3C4, HAUS4, IMMT, MCM7, MTHFD2, MYBL2, NEK2, NIPA2, and TCEB3) decreasing cell number, activating p16/p21, and undergoing morphological changes that resemble cellular senescence. Conclusions: Overall, our work provides a benchmark resource for researchers to study cellular senescence, and our systems biology analyses reveal new insights and gene regulators of cellular senescence.

Background

In the 1960s, Leonard Hayflick and Paul Moorhead demonstrated that human fibroblasts reached a stable proliferative growth arrest between their fortieth and sixtieth divisions [1]. Such cells would enter an altered state of "replicative senescence," subsisting in a nonproliferating, metabolically active phase with a distinct vacuolated morphology [2]. This intrinsic form of senescence is driven by gradual replicative telomere erosion, eventually exposing an uncapped free double-stranded chromosome end and triggering a permanent DNA damage response [3,4]. Additionally, acute premature senescence can occur as an antagonistic consequence of genomic, epigenomic, or proteomic damage, driven by oncogenic factors, oxidative stress, or radiation [5]. Initially considered an evolutionary response to reduce mutation accrual and subsequent tumorigenesis, the pleiotropic nature of senescence has also been positively implicated in processes including embryogenesis [6,7], wound healing [8], and immune clearance [9,10]. By contrast, the gradual accumulation and chronic persistence of senescent cells with time promotes deleterious effects that are considered to accelerate deterioration and hyperplasia in aging [11].

Senescent cells secrete a cocktail of inflammatory and stromal regulators-denoted as the senescence-associated secretory phenotype, or SASP-which adversely impact neighboring cells, the surrounding extracellular matrix, and other structural components, resulting in chronic inflammation, the induction of senescence in healthy cells, and vulnerable tissue [12,13]. Mice expressing transgenic INK-ATTAC, which induces apoptosis of p16-positive senescent cells, also have increased lifespan and improved healthspan [14]. It is, therefore, no surprise that in recent years gerontology has heavily focused on the prevention or removal of senescent cells as a means to slow or stop aging and related pathologies [15][16][17].

Research has sought to ascertain the genetic program and prodrome underlying the development and phenotype of senescent cells [18]. Expedited by recent advances in genomic and transcriptomic sequencing, alongside highthroughput genetic screens, a wealth of publicly available data now exists which has furthered the understanding of senescence regulation [19,20]. Unfortunately, despite our increasing knowledge of cellular senescence (CS), determining whether a cell has senesced is not clearcut. Common senescence markers used to identify CS in vitro and in vivo include senescence-associated βgalactosidase (SA-β-gal) and p16 INK4A (p16) [21][22][23]. However, β-galactosidase activity has been detected in other cell types such as macrophages, osteoclasts, and cells undergoing autophagy [24][25][26]. Furthermore, some forms of senescence are not associated with p16 expression, while p16 has been detected in non-senescent cells [3,27]. As such, there are now over 200 genes implicated in CS in humans alone. Therefore, it is necessary to conglomerate this data into a purposefully designed database.

Gene databases are highly useful for genomic computational analyses, as exemplified by the Human Ageing Genomic Resources (HAGR) [28]. HAGR provides databases related to the study of aging, including the GenAge database of aging-related genes, which contains genes related to longevity and aging in model organisms and humans, and DrugAge, which includes a compilation of drugs, compounds, and supplements that extend lifespan in model organisms. CellAge builds on these HAGR facilities to provide a means of studying CS in the context of aging or as a standalone resource; the expectation is that CellAge will now provide the basis for processing the discrete complexities of cellular senescence on a systematic scale.

Our recent understanding of biological networks has led to new fields, like network medicine [29]. Biological networks can be built using protein interaction and gene co-expression data. A previous paper used proteinprotein interactions to build genetic networks identifying potential longevity genes along with links between genes and aging-related diseases [30]. Here, we present the network of proteins and genes co-expressed with the CellAge senescence genes. Assaying the networks, we find links between senescence and immune system functions and find genes highly connected to CellAge genes under the assumption that a guilt-by-association approach will reveal genes with similar functions [31].

In this study, we look at the broad context of CS genes-their association with aging and aging-related diseases, functional enrichment, evolutionary conservation, and topological parameters within biological networks-to further our understanding of the impact of CS in aging and diseases. Using our networks, we generate a list of potential novel CS regulators and experimentally validate 26 genes using siRNAs, identifying 13 new senescence inhibitors.

Results

The CellAge database

The CellAge website can be accessed at http://genomics. senescence.info/cells/. Figure 1a presents the main CellAge data browser, which allows users to surf through the available data. The browser includes several columns with information that can be searched and filtered efficiently. Users can search for a commaseparated gene list or for individual genes. Once selected, a gene entry page with more detailed description of the experimental context will open.

CellAge was compiled following a scientific literature search of gene manipulation experiments in primary, immortalized, or cancer human cell lines that caused cells to induce or inhibit CS. The first CellAge build comprises 279 distinct CS genes, of which 232 genes affect replicative CS, 34 genes affect stress-induced CS, and 28 genes affect oncogene-induced CS. Of the 279 total genes, 153 genes induce CS (~54.8%), 121 inhibit it (~43.4%), and five genes have unclear effects, both inducing and inhibiting CS depending on experimental conditions (~1.8%) (Fig. 1b). The genes in the dataset are also classified according to the experimental context used to determine these associations.

We have also performed a meta-analysis to derive a molecular signature of replicative CS and found 526 overexpressed and 734 underexpressed genes [32]. These gene signatures are also available on the CellAge website. Of the 279 CellAge genes, 44 genes were present in the signatures of CS (15.8%). This overlap was significant (p value = 1.62e−08, Fisher's exact test). While 13 of the CellAge inducers of CS significantly overlapped with the overexpressed signatures of CS (8.5%, p = 2.06e−06, Fisher's exact test), only 7 overlapped with the underexpressed signatures (4.6%, p = 5.13e−01, Fisher's exact test). The CellAge inhibitors of CS significantly overlapped with both the overexpressed signatures of CS (n = 7, 5.8%, p = 4.08e−02, Fisher's exact test) and underexpressed signatures of CS (n = 17, 14%, p = 2.06e−06, Fisher's exact test).

CellAge gene functions