Using all protein-coding genes from the meta-analysis as a background list [42], we further examined the CS inducers overexpressed with age for functional enrichment using WebGestalt 2019 to determine if specific biological processes were enriched [38]. In parallel, we performed this analysis using the genes which overlapped between CellAge inhibitors and genes overexpressed with age. In total, 71 GO terms were significantly enriched for the overlap between CellAge senescence inducers and age upregulated genes (p < 0.05 Fisher's exact test with BH correction) (Additional file 1: Table S9). Because many of the enriched GO terms were redundant (e.g., wound healing and response to wound healing, regulation of cytokine production and cytokine production), they were clustered based on semantic similarity scores using REVIGO [37]. We found groups enriched for regulation of apoptotic processes, response to lipid, epithelium development, rhythmic process, circadian rhythm, cytokine metabolism, and cell-substrate adhesion (Additional file 2: Fig. S3A). A total of 71 enriched GO terms for the overexpressed signatures of CS overexpressed with age were clustered using REVIGO, resulting in enriched terms relating to regulated exocytosis, aging, response to beta-amyloid, and cell proliferation (Additional file 1: Table S10; Additional file 2: Fig. S3B).

No GO terms were significantly enriched for the inducers of CS underexpressed with age, the inhibitors of CS differentially expressed with age, the underexpressed signatures of CS differentially expressed with age, or the overexpressed signatures of CS underexpressed with age.

Tissue-specific CS gene expression and differential expression of CS genes in human tissues with age

The Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) project contains expression data from 53 different tissue sites collected from 714 donors ranging from 20 to 79 years of age, grouped into 26 tissue classes [43]. We asked if CellAge genes and differentially expressed signatures of CS were expressed in a tissue-specific manner [42] and determined how CS gene expression changes across different tissues with age [32].

We first examined tissue-specific CS expression and found that CellAge genes were either expressed in a tissue-specific manner less than expected by chance, or in line with expectations; in other words, the majority of CellAge genes tended to be expressed across multiple tissues (Additional file 1: Table S11; Additional file 2: Fig. S4A). Testis was the only tissue with significant differences between the actual and expected number of tissue-specific CellAge genes expressed (less tissuespecific genes than expected by chance, p < 0.05, Fisher's exact test with BH correction). The underexpressed signatures of CS were significantly less tissue-specific in the testis and liver, while the overexpressed signatures of CS were significantly less tissue-specific in the brain, liver, pituitary, and skin, and more tissue-specific in blood. We also compared the ratio of tissue-specific to nontissue-specific genes in the CS datasets to all protein-coding genes. While~25% of all protein-coding genes are expressed in a tissue-specific manner, only~10% of CellAge genes and~11% of signatures of CS are expressed in a tissue-specific manner (Additional file 2: Fig. S4B), significantly less than expected by chance (p = 2.52e−12 and 3.93e−48 respectively, Fisher's exact test with BH correction).

Then, we examined the differential expression of CS genes with age in different tissues. Using a previously generated gene set of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) with age in 26 tissues on GTEx [32,43], we found overlaps with 268 CellAge inducers and inhibitors of CS present in the gene expression data (Fig. 2a). The process of finding DEGs with age filters out lowly expressed genes, which explains the 11 missing CellAge CS regulators. Overall, senescence inducers were overexpressed across different tissues with age, although none of the overlaps were significant after FDR correction (Fisher's exact test with BH correction, p < 0.05) (Additional file 1: Table S12). There was the opposite trend in the inhibitors of CS, where there was noticeably less overexpression of CS inhibitors with age, although these overlaps were also not significant after FDR correction. A total of 1240 differentially expressed signatures of CS were also overlapped with the GTEx aging DEGs in 26 human tissues, including 9 tissues previously analyzed ( Fig. 2b) [32]. The overexpressed signatures of CS were significantly overexpressed across multiple tissues with age, and only significantly underexpressed with age in the brain and uterus (p < 0.05, Fisher's exact test with BH correction) (Additional file 1: Table S13).

Furthermore, the underexpressed signatures of CS trended towards being overexpressed less than expected by chance across multiple tissues with age, although these overlaps were only significant after FDR adjustment in the colon and nerve, while the underexpressed signatures of CS were significantly overexpressed more than expected in the uterus. Finally, the underexpressed signatures of CS were underexpressed with age more than expected by chance in the colon, lung, and ovary, and underexpressed with age less than expected by chance in the brain. We also compared the ratio of differentially expressed to non-differentially expressed CS genes in at least one tissue with age to the equivalent ratio in all protein-coding genes (Additional file 2: Fig. S5A and S5B) (see Overlap Analysis in Methods). We found that 64% of all protein-coding genes did not significantly change expression with age in any human tissues, whilẽ 19% were overexpressed and~17% were underexpressed (~7% were both overexpressed and underexpressed across multiple tissues) (Additional file 1: Table S14 and S15). For the CellAge genes, the number of inducers of CS significantly overexpressed with age in at least one tissue was significantly higher than the genome average (n = 50,~30%, p = 1.5e−3, Fisher's exact test with BH correction). The inducers of CS underexpressed with age and the inhibitors of CS differentially expressed with age were not significantly different from the protein-coding average.

We also compared the number of signatures of CS differentially expressed with age in at least one tissue to the proteincoding genome average. The overexpressed signatures of CS were significantly differentially expressed with age compared to all protein-coding genes, whereas the number of underexpressed signatures of CS was underexpressed with age more than expected by chance.

The overall fold change (FC) with age of the CS genes was also compared to the FC with age of all proteincoding genes for each tissue in GTEx ( Fig. 2c; Additional file 1: Table S16). The median log 2 FC with age of the CellAge CS inducers and the overexpressed signatures of CS was greater than the genome median for the majority of tissues on GTEx, although the difference in log 2 FC distribution with age between the inducers of CS and all protein-coding genes was only significant in seven tissues (Wilcoxon rank sum test with BH correction, p < 0.05). The median log 2 FC with age of the CellAge inhibitors of CS and the underexpressed signatures of aging was smaller than the genome median in the majority of tissues, showcasing the opposite trend to the inducers of CS and overexpressed signatures of CS. However, the only tissues with significantly different distributions of log 2 FC with age for the inhibitors of CS were the skin and esophagus, where the median log 2 FC distribution was significantly less than the genome average, and the salivary gland, where the median log 2 FC distribution was significantly more than the genome average. We also found that the distribution of log 2 FC with age of the differentially expressed signatures of CS significantly changed in opposite directions with age in 14 tissues.

Interestingly, this trend was present even in the adrenal gland and uterus, where the signatures of CS changed with age in the opposite direction to the majority of other tissues.

The expression of the majority of CS genes does not change with age (Additional file 2: Fig. S5A), yet a significant number of CS genes trend towards differential expression with age across multiple tissues in humans (Fig. 2). We ran 10,000 simulations on the GTEx RNAseq data to determine the likelihood of a CS gene being differentially expressed with age in more than one tissue by chance (see Simulation of CS Gene Expression in Human Aging in Methods) (Additional file 2: Fig. S5C; Additional file 5). The likelihood of a CellAge gene being overexpressed with age in more than three tissues and underexpressed with age in more than two tissues by chance was less than 5% (CS gene expression simulations) ( Fig. 2d; Additional file 1: Table S17; Additional file 2: Fig. S5C). CS inducers overexpressed in significantly more tissues with age than expected by chance included CDKN2A, NOX4, CPEB1, IGFBP3. Red values indicate that there were more genes differentially expressed with age than expected by chance (−log 2 (p-val)). Blue values indicate that there were less genes differentially expressed with age than expected by chance (log 2 (p-val)). Asterisks (*) denote tissues with significantly more CS genes differentially expressed with age (p < 0.05, Fisher's exact test with BH correction, abs(50*log 2 FC) > log 2 (1.5)) (Additional file 1: Table  S12 and S13).