We also made an unweighted microarray co-expression network built from the COXPRESdb database of microarray gene co-expression (V6) [57] (Additional file 2: Fig. S12). Compared with the RNA-seq co-expression network, the microarray network is significantly smaller, and only included 34% of the CellAge genes (Additional file 1: Table S32). However, we found that SMC4 was an important bottleneck in the microarray network, being in the top 5% CC and IC (Additional file 2: Fig. S12D and S12E). SMC4 was not independently associated with senescence despite being part of the condensing II complex, which is related to cell senescence [70]. Furthermore, SMC4 is associated with cell cycle progression and DNA repair, two key antagonist mechanisms of cell senescence development [71,72]. SMC4 has been linked to cell cycle progression, proliferation regulation, and DNA damage repair, in accordance to the most significantly highlighted functional clusters in the module 2 and in the whole Microarray network (Additional file 1: Table S39 and S40; Additional file 2: Fig. S13) [73,74]. There was limited overlap between the microarray co-expression network and the RNA-seq co-expression network, although this is not surprising considering the higher specificity and sensitivity, and ability to detect low-abundance transcripts of RNAseq [75].

Experimental validation of senescence candidates

We set out to test if candidate genes from our network analyses are indeed senescence inhibitors using a siRNA-based approach, whereby knockdowns enable the p16 and/or the p21 senescence pathway to be induced, leading to senescence [76]. We tested 26 potential senescence inhibitor candidates, 20 of which were chosen using GeneFriends, a guilt-by-association database to find co-expressed genes [59]. For this, we used the CellAge CS inhibitors as seed genes, with the assumption that genes co-expressed with senescence inhibitors would also inhibit senescence, and generated a list of the top co-expressed genes with CS inhibitors based on RNA-seq data (Additional file 1: Table S41). Furthermore, CellAge has multiple ways of partitioning genes, including the type of senescence the genes are involved in (Fig. 1b). We decided to look for genes co-expressed with stress-induced premature senescence (SIPS) inhibitors. We generated a list of genes that are co-expressed with the CellAge SIPS genes (Additional file 1: Table  S42). We chose to validate five additional genes that were both co-expressed with the CellAge SIPS and are present as underexpressed in our signature of CS [32]. Finally, we chose SMC4 from the microarray network due to its interaction with other senescence genes within the network, its association with cell cycle progression, and the fact that it is underexpressed in senescent cells, indicating it may be inhibiting senescence in replicating cells.

The genes chosen, along with experimental validation results are shown in Fig. 5, while the justification for our validation and Z-scores are shown in Additional file 1: Table S43 and S44 respectively.

Next, we performed transient siRNA transfections of normal human fibroblasts using the 26 candidates and identified those siRNAs that generated the induction of a senescence phenotype, using multiparameter analysis of morphological measures and a panel of senescence markers. Senescence induction is associated with a loss of proliferation, as measured by a decrease in Ki67 index and cell number, and changes in cellular morphology, as measured by an increase in cell and nuclear area. We also quantitated changes in p16 and p21 (key senescence effectors [76]), interleukin 6 (IL-6, a common SASP marker) and SA-β-galactosidase. Knockdown of cyclophilin B, a housekeeper, acted as a negative control [2], while knockdown of CBX7, a potent senescence inhibitor, was included as a positive control for senescence induction [77]. Of the 26 genes tested, 80.7% (21/26) . a DAPI (blue) and Ki67 (green). b DAPI (blue) and Cell Mask (red). c DAPI (blue), p16 (green) and p21 (red). d DAPI (blue) and IL-6 (red). e Brightfield images following staining for SA-β-galactosidase. Size bar, 100 μm. f Heatmap of multiparameter analysis of proliferation markers (cell number and % Ki67 positive), senescence-associated morphology (cellular and nuclear area) and senescence markers (% p16 positive, p21 intensity, perinuclear IL-6 and perinuclear SA-β-galactosidase). Colors illustrate the number of Z-scores the experimental siRNA is from the cyclophilin B (cycloB) negative control mean.

Data are ranked by whether or not the siRNA is a top hit (siRNAs between the thick horizontal lines), and then by the cell number Z-score. Red values indicate Z-scores that are "senescence-associated measures." The CBX7 positive control is also shown for comparison. Data presented are from at least two independent experiments each performed with a minimum of three replicates. All Z-scores are available in Additional file 1: Table S44 resulted in a decrease in Ki67 positive nuclei greater than 1 Z-score (i.e., direction of change also observed for the CBX7 siRNA positive control, Fig. 5; Additional file 1: Table S44)

Discussion

CellAge aims to be the benchmark database of genes controlling cellular senescence and we expect it to be an important new resource for the scientific community. The development of CellAge has also provided us with the means to perform systematic analyses of CS. While showcasing the functionality of CellAge in this manuscript, we have also explored the links between CS and aging, ARDs, and cancer. At the same time, we have aimed to expand the knowledge on both the evolution and function of senescence genes, and on how CS genes interact and form genetic networks. We showed that the use of CellAge may help in identifying new senescencerelated genes and we have validated several such genes experimentally. As the body of knowledge around senescence grows, it is our aim to maintain a quality resource to allow integrative analyses and guide future experiments.

We began our CellAge analysis by gaining further insight into the function of CellAge genes (Additional file 2: Fig. S3). Unsurprisingly, inducers of CS were enriched for both VEGF and TNF signalling (Additional file 1: Table S1 and S2). Secretion of VEGF is a component of the senescence phenotype and has been shown to contribute towards cancer progression [78]. Interestingly, the CellAge genes are more strongly conserved in mammals compared to other protein-coding genes, an effect not seen in worms, yeast, or flies (Additional file 1: Table S4; Additional file 2: Fig. S1A and S1B). Given the role that many of the senescence genes in CellAge play in regulating the cell cycle, it makes sense that they are evolutionarily conserved; it is not entirely surprising that there is a greater evolutionary pressure towards conserving cell cycle tumor-suppressor genes than there is towards conserving other genes. Notably, the pattern of evolutionary conservation of CS genes was found to be almost identical to that of cancer-associated genes, apparently reflecting the co-evolution between these two phenomena [53]. Nonetheless, evolutionary genomics in a comparative context allows us to have a more comprehensive understanding of the genetic bases in important phenotypic traits, like longevity [79]. During their evolutionary history, it is possible that longlived species found ways to more efficiently solve problems related to the aging process [80,81].

Lineages where naturally important gene regulators (e.g., TP53) have alternative molecular variants or have been lost from their genomes [82,83] can be investigated as natural knockouts [84], since they have found a different way to solve agingrelated diseases like cancer [85,86]. We also found that the evolutionary distance between long-lived species is randomly distributed (Additional file 2: Fig. S1D; Additional file 4). Since longevity is a plastic trait that is related to multiple factors in the evolutionary history of the organisms (e.g., reproduction, body mass, habitat, metabolism, risk of predation), the way in which these genes evolved could be independent in the long-lived species analyzed.

The relationship between CS and longevity was highlighted across various sections of this manuscript. The inducers of senescence were significantly overrepresented in the anti-longevity human orthologues, while the inhibitors of senescence were even more overrepresented in the pro-longevity human orthologues (Additional file 1: Table S7) [34]. Furthermore, both the CellAge regulators of CS and the overexpressed signatures of CS were significantly overrepresented in the overexpressed aging signatures from the human, rat, and mouse aging signature meta-analysis [42]. Interestingly, we found that the overexpressed signatures of replicative CS overexpressed with age were significantly enriched for regulated exocytosis (including leukocyte activation), cell proliferation, and aging (Additional file 1: Table S10; Additional file 2: Fig. S3B). The SASP is a known inducer of chronic inflammation in aged tissue [12,13], and the enrichment of terms relating to leukocyte activation highlights the role CS plays in activating the immune system via inflammatory factors with age. One tissue that consistently showed different CS expression patterns with age was the uterus. This observations was already noted in a previous study which also observed that DEGs downregulated in cancer were upregulated with age and DEGs upregulated in cancer were downregulated with age in six tissues, but not in the uterus [32].