Remarkably, the percent of essential CS genes (42%) is considerably higher than that for all genes (p < E-25) and even higher than the percent of essential LAGs (p = 2.5E-10 and p = 6.2E-06 for entire genome and interactome, respectively), genes involved in Alzheimer's disease (p = 1.5E-04 and p = 0.001) and aging-associated processes (p < 0.002) (Fig. 3). This could at least in part be explained by the fact that the CS genes are highly enriched with genes involved in the regulation of basic, housekeeping processes such as cell cycle, cell growth, programmed cell death, DNA repair, and cellular response to stress (Suppl. Table 2).

Evolutionary conservation

Essential genes are generally more evolutionary conserved than non-essential ones [32]. In support of this notion are recent findings of Waterhouse et al. [33] who demonstrated that the essential genes from model organisms are significantly enriched in orthologs across the vertebrate, arthropod and fungal lineages. The high percentage of essential CS genes led us to explore the possibility that CS genes are highly evolutionary conserved as a whole. With this in mind, we have examined the frequency of orthologs for the human CS genes in over 100 species found currently in the InParanoid database ( [34], http://inparanoid.sbc.su.se). We found that CS genes are significantly more conserved than are the genes in the whole human genome. This is clearly noted across the vertebrate species but the difference is insignificant in lower organisms. In Fig. 4, this is shown for a selected set of well-studied model organisms, from yeast to mouse. The same observation was true for the whole InParanoid set (data not shown). Notably, the pattern of evolutionary conservation of CS genes is almost identical to that of cancer-associated genes (see Fig. 1B in [22]). It would be then tempting to speculate that this similarity is a result of the co-evolution between these two phenomena. Indirectly supporting this assumption are observations on the naked mole rat, a species with an extraordinary resistance to cancer [35], whose fibroblasts do not undergo CS.

Instead, they display early contact inhibition, an anti-cancer mechanism based on cell division arrest before reaching a high cell density [36]. Another example is chinchilla, a rodent with a low cancer incidence [37] that also does not develop CS, but evolved other anticancer adaptations such as continuous slow cell proliferation [18].

Molecular links between CS genes, LAGs and ARD genes

For a more specific analysis, we further addressed the following questions: (i) Are there genes common for CS and other aging/longevity-related categories? (ii) Could genes involved in CS, ARDs and in the control of life span interact via direct PPIs or their common partners? (iii) Is the set of CS genes enriched in genes associated with ARDs and age-related conditions? (iv) Could the expression of these genes be under the control of common regulatory molecules, more specifically, miRNAs? (v) Are there common pathways for CS, ARDs and aging-associated processes?

Common genes

The analysis revealed that 19% of the CS genes are also orthologous to LAGs from model organisms, and 53% of the CS genes are involved in at least one ARD ( Table   1). The highest overlap was observed for cancer (53%); lesser values were observed for atherosclerosis (20%), Alzheimer's disease (9%) and type 2 diabetes (9%). The overlap of CS genes with oxidative stress and chronic inflammation associated genes reached 21% and 8%, respectively. In all the above cases, the overlap was significantly greater than expected by chance (p < E-25). Notably, among overlapping genes there are many which are essential for growth and development (from 38% to 55%, depending on the gene set). This high percentage of essential genes is comparable to that found in the Common Gene Signature of longevity and major ARD networks [25].

Protein-protein interactions and common protein partners

Apart from common genes, a great number of CS proteins directly interact with LAGs and ARD proteins through PPIs (Table 1). As such, the majority of CS genes fall either in the category of common genes or in that of genes directly connected to LAGs or ARD genes. In total, the genes in these two categories exceed 80% of the entire CS set. In addition, there are many common external protein partners, the number of which is more than one order of magnitude higher than that of common genes. As a result, almost all CS genes are linked to longevity and/or ARDs in one of the following ways -as common molecules, by forming protein complexes via PPIs, or through common partners.

AS

Atherosclerosis, AD

Alzheimer's disease

Common miRNA regulators

Another important possibility by which CS genes, LAGs and ARD genes could be linked is the posttranscriptional co-regulation of their expression through common miRNAs. Among the CS genes, 40 have thus far been experimentally validated as being the targets of 39 miRNAs. Of these miRNAs, almost all have targets reported to be involved in cancer and atherosclerosis and many have targets associated with other age-related conditions and longevity (Table 1). Notably, a large number of these miRNAs were indeed found to be directly involved in ARDs (Table 2). For example, out of the 38 miRNAs regulating the expression of both CS and cancer genes, miRNAs belonging to the miR-17, miR-19, miR-21, miR-24, miR-155, miR-214, miR-221, miR-372, and miR-373 families are oncogenic (oncomirs), while miRNAs of the let-7, miR-1, miR-8, miR-15, miR-29, miR-34, miR-101, miR-124, miR-125, miR-127, miR-145 families have a tumor suppressor activity [38,39,40,41]. In fact, as seen in Table 2, all the miRNAs common to CS and atherosclerosis, AD or type 2 diabetes are also cancer-associated.

Cancer genes and miRNAs bridge CS with other ARDs

There are many common genes for the major human ARDs [22,23,25]. What are these genes and how do they contribute to the overlaps between CS and ARD genes? As already mentioned (see section 2.1), the CS genes are highly over-represented among LAGs and in all major ARDs and aging-associated conditions ( Table  1). This also follows from the enrichment analysis as shown in Fig. 5.

The highest fold-increase (19.3-fold vs. the expected value; p < E-25) was found for oxidative stress. This was quite expected as oxidative stress is one of the major CS inducers [42,43]. The unexpected observation, however, was that the second highest foldincrease value was found for atherosclerosis (18.7-fold; p < E-25), which is almost twice as high as that for cancer (10.9-fold; p<E-25) and other ARDs (10-12fold; p < E-25). However, further analysis revealed that cancer genes are the primary determinants of the links between CS and ARDs. Indeed, when the cancer genes were removed from the other ARD sets, no significant enrichment was found for any of these sets in CS. In contrast, after the removal of atherosclerosis, diabetes or Alzheimer's disease genes from the cancer set, the enrichment value for cancer genes in CS remained almost unchanged. Thus, the cancer genes are central in linking CS with other ARDs. Of note, the enrichment for CS genes with cancer genes increases when they are also represented in another or several other ARDs (Table 3). In particular, this can explain the high foldincrease in the case of atherosclerosis, since almost all atherosclerosis genes in CS are also cancer-associated (51 of 52).

Though the impact of CS on the developwww.impactaging.com ment of other ARDs is only beginning to be unveiled, accumulating evidence suggests a role of vascular cell senescence in atherosclerosis [44] and a clear cellular senescence component in type 2 diabetes [45] and Alzheimer's disease [46]. Altogether, our findings indicate that (i) cancer genes (together with miRNAs) determine the links between CS and other major human ARDs, and (ii) CS is particularly enriched in genes which are common to both cancer and other ARD(s).

Common signaling pathways

While analyzing the PPI networks of longevity and major human ARDs, we found that about half of the common proteins are related to signal transduction [23]. Moreover, we showed that the vast majority of these proteins are hubs, thus playing a central role in linking different ARDs. Therefore, our next question was whether there are common signaling pathways to CS and www.impactaging.com other sets examined in this study. Enrichment analysis could serve as a tool for answering this question. We found that several pathways are particularly enriched across CS, ARDs and aging-associated processes (Suppl . Table 3). Surprisingly, among them are many growth-promoting pathways such as the MAPK signaling, insulin signaling, mTOR signaling, ErbB signaling, neurotrophin signalling, etc (Fig. 6). This might seem paradoxical, since an irreversible growth arrest is the major (though not the only) feature of CS. However, recent findings shed light on this apparent discrepancy, clearly demonstrating that stimulation of cells, which have ceased proliferation, with growthpromoting mediators induces CS. In other words, growth-promoting pathways convert reversible quiescence into senescence [12,47,48]. Such an activation eventually leads to an enhanced secretion of cytokines, chemokines, proteases and ROS by senescent cells [49], collectively termed as the senescenceassociated secretory phenotype (SASP) [9,50].