Connectivity depicts the relationships among functionally segregated brain systems and can be classified into undirected and directed functional connectivity. Traditional FC is often used to investigate the statistical dependencies among several given seed regions in an undirected manner (Biswal et al., 1995). Directed FC is explicitly used to explore the functional interactions in a directed manner and can be estimated using the Granger causality model (Seth et al., 2015). The positive casual effect and negative causal effect can be quantified with positive and negative signed-path coefficients and interpreted as activation and inhibition, respectively (Hamilton et al., 2011). Both undirected and directed FC are the components of functional integration that are used to analyze functional brain architectures (Friston et al., 2013). By combining the traditional FC and Granger causality analysis (GCA) approaches, more information can be obtained from different perspectives to map the connectivity pattern among the brain functional hubs that are probably affected by T2DM.

In this study, we hypothesized that the aberrant brain function of hubs and their connectivity may contribute to brain dysfunction in T2DM patients. The DC method was applied to identify the candidate functional hubs. Next, the FC and GCA methods were applied to investigate the connectivity among these functional hubs. We also investigated the relationships of brain functional alterations with clinical data and neuropsychological performance. Our study provides evidence to further understand the neurological mechanisms that underlie T2DM-associated cognitive impairment.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Subjects

T2DM patients were recruited from inpatients and the community and healthy controls (HC) were recruited from the community between December 2013 and December 2015. Forty-seven T2DM patients and 47 healthy controls, who were matched with regard to age, sex, education and body mass index (BMI), were enrolled in the study. Both the T2DM patients and the healthy controls met the following inclusion criteria: (1) between 45 and 70 years old; 2) at least six years of education; and (3) right-handedness. T2DM was diagnosed by endocrinologists according to the criteria published by the World Health Organization in 1999 (Alberti and Zimmet, 1998). The T2DM patients had at least 1 year of disease duration. The exclusion criteria for all participants were as follows: (1) organic disease in the brain, such as stroke, tumor, or a white matter lesion rating score ≥ 2 (Wahlund et al., 2001); (2) physical disability; (3) pregnancy, thyroid dysfunction; (4) signs of dementia (Mini-Mental State Examination [MMSE] score ≤ 24) (Galea and Woodward, 2005), major depression  > 20) (Hamilton, 1960), or other psychiatric disorders; (5) severe hearing or visual impairment; and (6) contraindications to MRI. Patients with T2DM-related complications were also excluded, including diabetic foot, retinopathy, and nephropathy.

The study protocol was approved by the Medical Research Ethics Committee of the Southwest Hospital (Chongqing, China). Written informed consent was obtained from participants after they were informed of the study details. Additionally, the study process strictly obeyed the protocol.

Clinical Data

The following information about the subjects was recorded using a standardized protocol: handedness, height, weight, BMI [weight in kg]/[height in m] 2 ), resting arm arterial blood pressure, medical history and current medications. For T2DM patients, we also recorded the date of diagnosis to calculate the disease duration. Venous blood samples were collected by venipuncture after overnight fasting for the biometric measurements, including glucose-related parameters (fasting plasma glucose, fasting insulin, fasting C-peptide, and glycosylated hemoglobin [

Neuropsychological Tests

All participants underwent cognitive status assessments with a battery of neuropsychological tests in a fixed order that assessed their global cognitive level and major cognitive subdomains. The global level of cognition was evaluated with the MMSE and Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) tests. The depressive state was evaluated with HAMD to exclude cases with major depression. The major cognitive subdomains were evaluated with the following tests: (1) the Trail Making Test (TMT, parts A and B) for executive function and psychomotor speed (Bowie and Harvey, 2006); (2) the Verbal Fluency Test (VFT) for mental flexibility (Diamond, 2013); (3) the Digit Span Test (DST, forwards and backwards) for working memory (Diamond, 2013); and (4) the Auditory Verbal Learning Test (AVLT, including immediate recall, short-term delayed recall, longterm delayed recall, long-term delayed recognition and total score) for episodic memory (Zhao et al., 2015). A trained neuropsychologist administered the battery of tests and was blinded to the group status. Each participant completed the assessment in approximately 60 min.

MRI Data Acquisition

MRI scan was performed on the same day that the clinical data were obtained and the cognitive test was performed. MRI data were acquired using a 3.0-T MR scanner (Trio, Siemens Medical, Erlangen, Germany) and a 12-channel head coil. Subjects were instructed to close their eyes, stay awake and avoid thinking about any topics. Earplugs and cushions were used to alleviate noise influence and restrict head motion, respectively. T2-weighted images: repetition time = 6,000 ms, echo time = 89 ms, flip angle = 120 • , field of view = 230 × 230 mm 2 , slices = 20, thickness = 5.0 mm, matrix = 448 × 448 and voxel size = 0.5 × 0.5 × 5.0 mm 3 . Fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) images: repetition time = 9,000 ms, echo time = 93 ms, flip angle = 130 • , field of view = 220 × 220 mm 2 , slices = 25, thickness = 4.0 mm, matrix = 256 × 256 and voxel size = 0.9 × 0.9 × 4.0 mm 3 . Resting-state functional images were collected using an echo planar imaging (EPI) sequence: repetition time = 2,000 ms, echo time = 30 ms, flip angle = 90 • , field of view = 192 × 192 mm 2 , slices = 36, thickness = 3 mm, matrix = 64 × 64 and voxel size = 3 × 3 × 3 mm 3 ; 240 volumes were transversely acquired.

T1-weighted structural images were collected using a volumetric 3D magnetization prepared by rapid-acquisition gradient-echo (MP-RAGE) sequence: repetition time = 1,900 ms, echo time = 2.52 ms, flip angle = 9 • , field of view = 256 × 256 mm 2 , slices = 176, thickness = 1 mm, matrix = 256 × 256 and voxel size = 1 × 1 × 1 mm 3 , sagittally scanned.

MRI Data Analysis

No subjects were excluded after the T2-weighted and FLAIR images were reviewed by two radiologists with at least five years of work experience.

Structural and functional data analyses were performed using toolkits based on Statistical Parametric Mapping 8 software (SPM 8, http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm). Intracranial tissue segmentation was performed with Voxel Based Morphometry Toolbox 8 software (VBM8, version 435) according to a previously described protocol (Whitwell, 2009). The main steps include spatial normalization to match every subject's T1weighed images to the template image, and segmentation of the intracranial tissue into gray matter, white matter and cerebrospinal fluid, which automatically produces information about the volumes of each part of the brain tissue. Gray matter was smoothed with 4 mm full-width half-maximum.

Functional data were preprocessed using Data Processing Assistant for Resting-State fMRI (DPARSF module v4.1 of Data Processing & Analysis of Brain Imaging v2.1, http://rfmri.org/ dpabi) according to the standard procedure (Yan and Zang, 2010). All DICOM files were converted to NifTI files. Next, the first 10 volumes were removed to enable the subjects to adapt to the scanning environment, especially the noise. Slice-timing was performed to correct the time differences between slices. Realignment was performed to correct head motion, and a report of head motion was created. Any subjects with head motion > 2.0 mm in any direction of x, y, and x or > 2.0 • at any angle were excluded from the subsequent statistical analyses. Friston 24-parameter model was applied to regress out head motion effects (Yan et al., 2013). Other nuisance variables including white matter signal and cerebrospinal fluid signal were regressed out. Individual functional images were normalized into the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) space for intersubject comparison. The resulting images were smoothed with 4 mm full-width halfmaximum. Detrending was applied to remove the systematic drift of the baseline signal. The data were bandpass filtered (0.01-0.08 Hz) to reduce physiological noise at other bands of frequency.

Based on preprocessing, DC calculations were performed using DPARSF in a voxel-wise manner with a threshold r > 0.25 in accordance with previous studies (Beucke et al., 2013;Mueller et al., 2013). Peak MNI coordinates of the candidate brain functional hubs were obtained via group comparison of DC maps and considered to be the center of the spherical region of interest (ROI) with a 6-mm radius. Connectivity among the ROIs was analyzed using rs-fMRI data analysis toolkits (REST v1.8, http://www.restfmri.net) in a ROI-wise manner, including FC and GCA analyses. For FC, the correlation coefficients between the ROIs were computed and normalized with Fisher's r-to-z transformation. For GCA, signed-path coefficients between ROIs were computed in a multivariate mode for the subsequent parametric statistical analyses (Hamilton et al., 2011).

Statistical Analysis