Inter-group comparisons of numeric data were conducted using SPSS software (version 20.0; IBM Corp., Armonk, NY) and included demographic data, clinical parameters, and neuropsychological test scores. First, the data distribution was verified using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. Second, independent samples of the t-test and Mann-Whitney U test were applied to normally distributed continuous data and to non-normally distributed data, respectively. The sex proportion was examined with the χ 2 test. p < 0.05 indicated statistical significance.

Intra-and inter-group analyses of DC maps were conducted using REST software. A one-sample t-test was applied to investigate the DC pattern with the base of "0" in the intragroup. An independent t-test was applied to investigate the DC differences between the groups with age, sex, education, BMI, blood pressure, blood biometric parameters (except fasting glucose, fasting insulin, fasting C-peptide and HbA 1c ) entered as covariates. Gray matter maps were also included as covariates to control the influence of structural changes in the T2DM patients. The resulting maps were corrected for multiple comparisons using AlphaSim (p < 0.001, cluster size > 20 voxels, number of Monte Carlo simulations = 10,000, cluster connection radius: rmm = 5.0).

For the z scores of FC and signed-path coefficients, statistical analyses were performed using SPSS software. A one-sample t-test was applied to investigate the patterns of FC and GCA in each group. An independent sample t-test was applied to investigate the differences between T2DM patients and healthy controls in terms of FC and GCA. The relationships of DC and connectivity with clinical parameters and neuropsychological test scores were explored through partial correlation analyses in SPSS software within the T2DM group. Both the independent sample t-test and the correlation analysis were adjusted with gray matter volumes, and the same covariates that employed in the inter-group analyses of the DC maps were applied to control their possible effect on the results. The independent sample t-test was also controlled for multiple comparisons with Bonferroni correction (p < 0.05/6 for FC and p < 0.05/12 for GCA).

RESULTS

Demographic and Clinical Data Comparison

No significant inter-group differences were found in terms of age, sex, education, BMI, blood pressure, total cholesterol, LDL cholesterol, blood urea nitrogen, cystatin C, uric acid and TSH. The T2DM patients had significantly higher levels of glucoserelated parameters, including fasting plasma glucose, fasting insulin, HbA 1c and HOMA2-IR index (all p < 0.05). The T2DM patients had significantly higher levels of triglycerides and homocysteine but lower fasting C-peptide and serum creatine levels (all p < 0.05). The inter-group differences in FT3 and FT4 were significant (all p < 0.05); however, the levels were within the normal range. The details are presented in Table 1.

Neuropsychological Test Comparison

The T2DM patients exhibited poorer performance on the tests of MoCA, TMT-B, DST forwards and long-term delayed recall of AVLT (all p < 0.05). No significant inter-group differences were observed in the other tests. The details are presented in Table 2.

Brain Volume Comparison

The general volumes of gray matter, white matter and brain parenchyma (the sum of gray and white matter) revealed no significant differences between the two groups ( Table 1).

DC Analysis

Compared to the global mean value, both groups displayed higher DC values in the posterior cingulate cortex, cuneus, angular gyrus, occipital cortex, superior frontal cortex, precentral gyrus and postcentral gyrus (Figures 1A,B). In the T2DM patients, significantly higher DC values were observed in the left anterior cingulate gyrus (ACG), and significantly lower DC values were observed in the bilateral lateral occipital cortices (LOC) and right precentral gyrus (PreCG). Details of the changed brain areas are presented in Table 3 ( Figures 1C,D).

Connectivity Analysis

For the FC analyses, the one-sample t-test suggested that FC existed in both groups among the ROIs, including the left ACG, right PreCG, and bilateral LOC (all p < 0.05; Figures 2A,B). The independent t-test suggested that the FC of the left ACG-right PreCG (p = 0.015) in T2DM patients was significantly stronger than that in the healthy controls, and the FC values of the left LOC-right PreCG (p = 0.011), right LOC-right PreCG (p = 0.019), and left LOC-right LOC (p = 0.001) were significantly weaker than those in the healthy controls (Figures 2C,D). After multiple comparisons correction, the FC of the left LOC-right LOC in T2DM patients was significantly weaker than that in the healthy controls (p < 0.05/6).

With respect to the GCA analyses, the one-sample t-test showed a positive causal effect from the left ACG to the left LOC and a negative causal effect from the left ACG to the right LOC in the healthy controls (Figures 3A,C). However, the conditions were inverted such that a negative causal effect from the left ACG to the left LOC and a positive causal effect from the left ACG to the right LOC were observed in the T2DM patients (Figures 3B,C). Significant differences between the two groups in terms of the two directed functional edges were observed (p < 0.05; Figure 3C). Unfortunately, the independent t-test results of GCA could not bear the multiple comparisons correction (p > 0.05/12).

Correlation Analysis

Signed-path coefficients from the left ACG to the left LOC were negatively correlated with fasting C-peptide levels (ρ = −0.386, p = 0.007; Figure 4A) in T2DM patients. Poor performance on the DST forwards was associated with elevated HbA 1c levels in T2DM patients (HbA 1c [%], ρ = −0.301, p = 0.040; HbA 1c [mmol/mol], ρ = −0.301, p = 0.040; Figure 4B). However, no correlations were observed between disrupted DC or connectivity and lower scores on the neuropsychological tests or disease duration.

DISCUSSION

To explore the possible neurological mechanisms underlying cognitive dysfunction in T2DM patients, we combined the DC, FC and GCA approaches to investigate the changes in the candidate brain functional hubs and their connectivity. The increased DC in left ACG and decreased DC in the occipital areas were consistent with a previous study (Cui et al., 2016). A novel finding was the increased DC in the right PreCG. The changed FC pattern of right PreCG may be associated with impaired preparation and execution of goal-directed actions. The GCA approach further revealed the disordered direct connectivity from the left ACG to bilateral occipital areas. The brain regions where identified hubs are located have been reported to be abnormal in previous studies using other neuroimaging metrics in T2DM patients, which suggests that these brain regions are susceptible to T2DM. The ACG is usually identified as the disturbed brain region across experiments and appeared with increased amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation, regional homogeneity Liu D. et al., 2016), and cerebral blood flow (Cui et al., 2017). The aforementioned  hyperactivity of ACG has usually been regarded as a means to compensate for the cognitive loss and maintain normal cognition (He et al., 2015;Liu D. et al., 2016;Cui et al., 2017). However, the mechanism of the compensation requires further research.

In contrast, a decreased amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation and regional homogeneity were observed in the occipital lobe (Xia et al., 2013;Cui et al., 2014;Peng et al., 2016). Decreased connectivity of the PreCG was found with the posterior cingulate cortex  and the thalamic . These brain regions also exhibited gray matter atrophy in T2DM patients (Chen et al., 2012;Garcia-Casares et al., 2014;Peng et al., 2015). We discovered a change in the number of edges that connect the bilateral LOC and right PreCG, which rendered these brain regions candidate functional hubs to be damaged in T2DM patients (Zuo et al., 2012). These findings provided information about the reorganized layout of the brain network with a graph theory-based approach in addition to previous studies. Placing the identified brain functional hubs into the context of brain local networks, the changed FC of the right PreCG may suggest impaired preparation and execution of goal-directed actions. The motor system participates in the constitution of internal representations of sensory information (Crowe et al., 2004) and obtains visually perceived information to prepare a motor response (Merchant and Georgopoulos, 2006). However, the decreased DC and FC values of the right PreCG indicated its decline in communication efficiency with the visual cortex and other brain regions.