LRRpredictor-A New LRR Motif Detection Method for Irregular Motifs of Plant NLR Proteins Using an Ensemble of Classifiers

Eliza C Martin eliza.martin@biochim.roe.c.m. Department of Bioinformatics and Structural Biochemistry Institute of Biochemistry of the Romanian Academy Splaiul Independentei 296060031BucharestRomania

C A Octavina

Sukarta

Laboratory of Nematology

Wageningen University and Research

6700ESWageningenThe Netherlands

Laurentiu Spiridon laurentiu.spiridon@biochim.rol.s. Department of Bioinformatics and Structural Biochemistry Institute of Biochemistry of the Romanian Academy Splaiul Independentei 296060031BucharestRomania

Laurentiu G Grigore

Space Comp SRL

041512BucharestRomania

Vlad Constantinescu vlad.ion.constantinescu@gmail.comv.c. Department of Bioinformatics and Structural Biochemistry Institute of Biochemistry of the Romanian Academy Splaiul Independentei 296060031BucharestRomania

Robi Tacutu robi.tacutu@gmail.comr.t. Department of Bioinformatics and Structural Biochemistry Institute of Biochemistry of the Romanian Academy Splaiul Independentei 296060031BucharestRomania

Aska Goverse

Laboratory of Nematology

Wageningen University and Research

6700ESWageningenThe Netherlands

Andrei-Jose Petrescu Department of Bioinformatics and Structural Biochemistry Institute of Biochemistry of the Romanian Academy Splaiul Independentei 296060031BucharestRomania

LRRpredictor-A New LRR Motif Detection Method for Irregular Motifs of Plant NLR Proteins Using an Ensemble of Classifiers 10.3390/genes11030286Received: 7 February 2020; Accepted: 4 March 2020; Published: 8 March 2020genes G C A T T A C G G C A T Article * Correspondence: aska.goverse@wur.nl (A.G.); andrei.petrescu@biochim.ro (A.-J.P.);leucine-rich repeat predictionsupervised learningLRR motifLRR structureNOD-like receptorsR proteins Leucine-rich-repeats (LRRs) belong to an archaic procaryal protein architecture that is widely involved in protein-protein interactions. In eukaryotes, LRR domains developed into key recognition modules in many innate immune receptor classes. Due to the high sequence variability imposed by recognition specificity, precise repeat delineation is often difficult especially in plant NOD-like Receptors (NLRs) notorious for showing far larger irregularities. To address this problem, we introduce here LRRpredictor, a method based on an ensemble of estimators designed to better identify LRR motifs in general but particularly adapted for handling more irregular LRR environments, thus allowing to compensate for the scarcity of structural data on NLR proteins. The extrapolation capacity tested on a set of annotated LRR domains from six immune receptor classes shows the ability of LRRpredictor to recover all previously defined specific motif consensuses and to extend the LRR motif coverage over annotated LRR domains.

This analysis confirms the increased variability of LRR motifs in plant and vertebrate NLRs when compared to extracellular receptors, consistent with previous studies. Hence, LRRpredictor is able to provide novel insights into the diversification of LRR domains and a robust support for structure-informed analyses of LRRs in immune receptor functioning.Genes 2020, 11, 286 2 of 26 LRRK2 kinase enzyme, lead to Parkinson's disease and other associated inflammatory diseases[5,6], whereas mutations in leucine-rich proteoglycans have been previously shown to be involved in osteoarthritis[7], and last but not least PRELP mutations might have a role in Hutchinson-Gilford, an accelerated progeroid syndrome characterized by premature aging[8]. Hence, understanding the structural aspects of binding properties and specificities of LRR domains opens wide possibilities for receptor engineering with vast implications not only for improved crop resistance to plant diseases, but also for a wide range of medical applications.In innate immunity, LRR modules are found in various domain organizations in many receptor classes such as plant receptor-like kinases (RLK), receptor-like proteins (RLP), NOD-like receptors (NLR), or metazoan NLR and Toll-like receptors (TLR).

In plant basal immunity, LRR N-terminal domains face the extracellular environment and are found in either receptor-like kinases (RLK) or receptor-like proteins (RLPs) depending on the presence or absence of a C-terminal kinase domain on the cytosolic side of the receptor. By contrast, LRRs constitute the C-terminal domains of intracellular NOD-like receptors (NLR), also known as resistance (R) proteins, and face the cytosolic environment to mediate resistance against specific pathogens. Depending on their N-terminal domain, which is either a coiled-coil (CC) or a toll-like receptor domain (TIR), R proteins fall into two main NLR classes: the CNL and TNL receptors, respectively[9]. Both these classes contain however a central nucleotide binding domain (NBS) which acts as a 'switch' that changes its conformation upon ADP/ATP binding [9,10].Metazoan NLRs show a similar organization with plant NLRs. They encode a variety of N-terminal 'sensors' (caspase activation and recruitment domains-CARD, baculovirus inhibitor of apoptosis repeat-BIR, etc. ), the central 'switch' STAND domain (signal transduction ATPases with numerous domains) -NBS/NACHT domain (NAIP (neuronal apoptosis inhibitory protein), CIITA (MHC class II transcription activator), HET-E (incompatibility locus protein from Podospora anserina) and TP1(telomerase-associated protein)) and the LRR domain at the C-terminal end.

Last but not least, we mention here the metazoan toll-like receptors (TLRs) that have an extracellular LRR sensor domain as seen in the RLK/RLP case and a TIR domain on the cytosolic side involved in signal transduction[11].From a structural point of view LRR domains have a solenoidal 'horseshoe' like 3D architecture composed of a variable number of repeats varying each from ≈15 to ≈30 amino acids in length. Repeats are held together through a network of hydrogen bonds which forms a beta sheet located on the ventral side of the 'horseshoe'. This is generated by a conserved sequence pattern named the LRR motif that in its minimal form is of the type 'LxxLxL' where L is generally leucine and to a lesser degree other hydrophobic amino acids[12]. Comprehensive sequence analysis of LRR immune receptors resulted in several classifications of LRR domains showing preferred amino acid conservation outside the minimal motif such as the two type classification proposed by Matsushima et al. [13]  for TLR receptors or the seven type classification proposed by Kobe and Kajava [14]  for all known LRR domains across all Kingdoms. However, exceptions to such rules are frequent as revealed by the Hidden Markov Model approach carried out by Ng et al. [15].

This highlighted the fact that most of the analyzed classes of human proteins containing LRR domains also display many irregular motifs alongside repeats showing the well-defined class specific motif[15].While the above mentioned receptor classes were shown to present LRR irregularities[15], studies on plant NLR proteins such as Lr10 and Pm3 from wheat, Rx1 and Gpa2 from potato, or ZAR1 from Arabidopsis show that their LRR domains have a far more variable and irregular structure than their extracellular counterparts[16][17][18][19][20][21][22]. These factors combined contribute to the challenge for the accurate prediction of LRR motifs in plant NLRs.A proper annotation of each LRR motif in a given LRR domain is instrumental in generating an accurate 3D model[12,23]and by this in properly defining the domain surface and identifying potential protein-protein interaction interfaces. An illustrative example is the conservation mapping performed by Helft et al. in 2011, which was used to identify new interaction partners of plant RLPs and RLKs by studying conserved 3D relationships among amino acids inferred from annotation of LRR repeats[24].

Introduction

The leucine-rich-repeat (LRR) domains are present in all of the tree of life branches. As they are involved in protein-protein interactions, LRR domains are found in receptors having a vast number of functions such as pathogen detection, immune response propagation, hormone perception, enzyme inhibition, or cell adhesion [1]. In both plants and mammals, a number of studies have detailed adverse effects associated with mutations in the LRR domains such as that reported for various immune-related receptors, resulting in compromised functions and enhanced disease progression [2]. For example, mutating a single residue in the LRR domain of the rice Pita receptor results in complete loss of recognition against the fungus Magnaporthe grisea [3] while mutations in the metazoan NLRC4-LRR contributes to autoinflammatory disease phenotypes [4]. Additionally, mutations in the Based on our previous work, identifying the individual true motifs in a LRR domain is hindered by the following: (a) in its minimal form, a 'LxxLxL' pattern is trivial and frequently occurs randomly in any protein; (b) in many cases several 'LxxLxL' patterns do overlap in less than 15 aa range in NLR-LRRs making the precise delineation difficult; (c) the number of 3D experimental structures from which to learn is low; and (d) this small 3D learning set is class and phyla biased-as around half of the structures are of mammalian origin while plant NLRs only have one recently documented structure [21,22].