In order to investigate LRRpredictor behavior on previously annotated LRR domains from various functional protein groups, we generated a collection of randomly selected 500 representatives from Uniprot50 database (i.e., below 50% identity between themselves at a given minimum overlap-version available at 20.11.2019-release-2019_10) which were annotated by Interpro to contain a LRR domain (IPR032675 and Interpro v77.0 protein2ipr database).

A total of six groups were generated: four groups of sequences of CNLs, TNLs, RLKs, and RLPs protein classes from flowering plants and two groups of TLRs and NLRs from vertebrates. Given the high conservation of vertebrate TLRs this set gathered only ≈350 sequences (File S3).

Within the CNL group, there were included only proteins annotated by Interpro to contain a single coiled-coil (CC) domain, a single NBS domain, and a LRR domain in this order, and sequences that contained a different domain organization, such as two annotated NBS domains or a different domain order were not included in the analysis. Similarly, for the TNL group we selected only sequences that contain a TIR-NBS-LRR domain organization. The RLK group was built with sequences displaying a "LRR-TM predicted region-kinase" domain organization, while the RLP group contained sequences with "LRR-TM" organization and did not contain other annotated domains by Interpro. In generating the vertebrate NLR group we included any annotated NACHT or NBS domains followed by a LRR domain annotation without discriminating on the N-terminal domain, as animal NLRs can have upstream of the NACHT/NBS domain a multitude of N-terminal domain types, while vertebrate TLRs group contains sequences with a "LRR-TM-TIR" configuration. Transmembrane predictions were performed using Phobius [56].

In analyzing the length of the LRR domains covered by individual repeat annotations, we used all Interpro annotation codes associated with LRR repeat types. We considered as having the status of 'annotated as domain' LRRs with the IPR032675 label and 'annotated as repeats' any amino acids Genes 2020, 11, 286 6 of 26 that had attached by at least one predictor part of Interpro collection one of the following tags: leucine-rich repeat (IPR001611), leucine-rich repeat, typical subtype (IPR003591), leucine-rich repeat, cysteine-containing subtype (IPR006553), leucine-rich repeat 2 (IPR013101), leucine-rich repeat 3 (IPR011713), leucine rich repeat 4 (IPR025875), BspA type leucine rich repeat region (IPR026906), CD180 leucine-rich repeat (IPR041281), DUF4458 domain-containing protein, leucine-rich repeat (IPR041403). Annotations referring to the N-ter cap of the LRR domain (IPR000372, IPR041302) were not considered as these are not LRR repeats.

Assessment of LRR Motif Conservation Across Protein Groups

Intra-and inter-group sequence variability was also analyzed using a subset of 1000 predicted 16 aa extended motifs from each group. In order to avoid a potential bias induced by false 'entry' (N) or 'exit' (C) repeats, only 'core' (L) repeats were used in this analysis. The similarity measure used here is the distance mapping defined by Halperin et al. [57]. This consists of the inner product of BLOSUM scores between each pair of amino acids summed up over the motif span, as this function can be used as a metric distance for several BLOSUM matrices. Considering d to be the distance between a pair of amino acids i and j, that have the s (i, j) BLOSUM score: d(i, j) = s(i, i) + s( j, j) − 2·s(i, j)(1) The distance between two sequences a and b of equal length l, would be the sum of distances of each pair of amino acids a i and b i across the length of the sequence: D a,b = l i=0 d(a i , b i ),(2) This definition of distance is expected to reflect amino acids compatibilities, as BLOSUM scores are inferred from amino acid mutation probabilities observed on large datasets. As a BLOSUM matrix we selected an updated version of the original BLOSUM matrix, which was recently recalculated on a large dataset and satisfies the triangle inequality. (RBLOSUM59_14.3) [58,59].

Starting from the above described distance function, we calculated Silhouette coefficients [60] between each pair of groups, and precomputed distances were used for manifold learning using metric multi-dimensional scaling (MDS) [61] as implemented in Scikit-learn library [50].

Sequences logos were generated using Weblogo [62], figures showing protein structures were obtained using PyMol [63], while other plots were generated in Microsoft Office or by using Matplotlib library [64].

Results

Available LRR Domains in Structural Data

A collection of 611 PDB structures previously annotated by several protein domain databases, such as CATH [28], Pfam [29], and Interpro-collection [30] to contain LRR horseshoe architectures was obtained. This collection was used to derive a clean set, ID90, of 178 LRR chains displaying 90% identity that was structurally analyzed in order to structurally delineate the LRR repeats based on the beta-sheet network. By this, a dataset of ≈2100 LRR motifs was obtained, as shown in Figure 1a. It is interesting to note here that less than 20% of these are annotated as LRR motifs in Pfam even though the 178 sequences were derived from known 3D structures.

The LRR motif annotation of each repeat was performed starting with the first position (L 0 ) of the minimal motif 'L 0 XXL 3 XL 5 ', position that marks the beginning of the ventral side of the horseshoe domain ( Figure 1b). Superposition of the 2100 repeats indicates that the structural similarity extends in most of the cases over five positions upstream and downstream of the minimal motif defining a 16 positions region which is referred herein as the 'extended' motif ( Figure A1d). Due to this, the structural Genes 2020, 11, 286 7 of 26 LRR diversity concentrates mainly onto the dorsal side of the horseshoe which imposes onto the curvature and the overall geometry of the domain ( Figure 1b).

As duplications of highly similar LRR repeats within the same LRR domain is abundant in the ID90 set, we opted to perform a second redundancy filter at the level of LRR repeats as described (M&M). This results in the ID50 nonredundant set consisting of ≈850 LRR repeats, that approximates well the ID90 distribution of lengths ( Figure A1c), phyla (Figure 1c), and the ratio between marginal N-terminal (N) and C-terminal (C) versus interior motifs (L) ( Figure A1b).

The 'entry' N-ter LRR motifs are less regular than the 'core' motifs, especially at the first hydrophobic position (L 0 ) that is often found solvent exposed, as this position marks the end of the inter-domain linker and the beginning of the LRR domain. By contrast, the 'exit' C-ter LRR motifs better resemble the 'core' motifs (L) amino acid composition and the conventional LRR motif 'L 0 xxL 3 xL 5 xx(N/C) 8 xL 10 ' (Figure 1d). Interestingly, the stringency for leucine occurrence sequentially decreases from L 0 to L 3 and L 5 in core repeats, allowing other amino acids to be present in L 3 and L 5 more frequently (Figure 1d). This structurally correlates with a larger accessible space of the protein core structure around L 3 and L 5 positions, as can be seen from Figures 1b and A1d. It is also worth noting that the third L -3 position upstream of LxxLxL has a significant hydrophobic propensity presumably allowing the solenoid to form (Figure 1d).

Another important facet that has to be carefully pondered is the high phyla bias of the structural data when compared to the baseline phyla distribution of the UniRef50 database. As can be seen from Figure 1c, around 50% of the repeats in ID50 are of mammalian origin while the UniRef50 baseline is of less than 3% in both annotated LRR proteins or any protein. Moreover, the ≈20% plant LRR motifs present in ID50 originate overwhelmingly from RLP and RLK proteins while plant NLRs are poorly represented in this set, with only a single 3D structure recently reported for the ZAR1 NLR protein from Arabidopsis thaliana [21,22]. well the ID90 distribution of lengths ( Figure A1c), phyla (Figure 1c), and the ratio between marginal N-terminal (N) and C-terminal (C) versus interior motifs (L) ( Figure A1b). The 'entry' N-ter LRR motifs are less regular than the 'core' motifs, especially at the first hydrophobic position (L0) that is often found solvent exposed, as this position marks the end of the inter-domain linker and the beginning of the LRR domain. By contrast, the 'exit' C-ter LRR motifs better resemble the 'core' motifs (L) amino acid composition and the conventional LRR motif 'L0xxL3xL5xx(N/C)8xL10' (Figure 1d). Interestingly, the stringency for leucine occurrence sequentially decreases from L0 to L3 and L5 in core repeats, allowing other amino acids to be present in L3 and L5 more frequently (Figure 1d).

This structurally correlates with a larger accessible space of the protein core structure around L3 and L5 positions, as can be seen from Figures 1b and A1d. It is also worth noting that the third L-3 position upstream of LxxLxL has a significant hydrophobic propensity presumably allowing the solenoid to form (Figure 1d).