Further, the amino acid composition of the predicted LRR motifs was investigated solely on the 'core' predicted LRR repeats, i.e., repeats that are flanked by other predicted repeats within a 15-35 As seen in Figure 4a, repeat lengths are rarely found outside the 19-35aa range, cases in which prediction becomes ambiguous. Too short repeats are improbable due to structural constraints and might indicate false positive predictions. Similarly, too long repeats-over 40 amino acids-could indicate either the presence of undetected repeats (false negatives) or cases in which an insertion or 'island' shapes up protruding the horseshoe structure (Figure 4a). Very large gaps between LRR motifs (more than 100 aa) were not included in computing the length distribution as these are rather indicating the presence of an inserted domain flanked by two LRR domains.

We further analyzed the percent of the annotated LRR domain span that is covered by LRRpredictor and compared the predicted LRR motifs to LRRfinder [26] and LRRsearch [27] predictions and to the existing motif annotations from Interpro collection. In doing so we defined as predicted repeats motifs separated by 15-35 amino acids. Predicted motifs that superpose or cluster within 15 amino acids were counted only once, while when the distance between two motifs was higher than 35, the repeat was considered to be a potential terminal repeat or contain a domain break and the first 24 aa of such a stretch was assigned as a predicted repeat, given that this is the most frequent repeat length over the structural data.

The repeat coverage of analyzed LRR domains predicted by LRRpredictor, LRRfinder and LRRsearch were compared to the extent Interpro repeat annotations using a coverage percentage (CP) defined as the ratio between the sum of predicted/annotated repeat length vs the overall LRR domain length (Figure 4b).

Plant NLRs from flowering plants show the lowest level of repeat annotation as 75% and 50% of CNL and TNL LRRs in Interpro lack any repeat annotation resulting in CP = 0% (Figure 4b).

In comparison, repeats in vertebrate NLRs are better annotated in a CP ranging within 20-60% of the LRR domain. Even higher Interpro repeat annotations are shown by the extracellular plant and vertebrate receptors with CP ranging most frequently between 30% and 80% of the LRR domain size (Figure 4b). For all six receptor classes analyzed herein, both LRRfinder and LRRsearch slightly increase the LRR coverage as compared to Interpro annotations especially in the case of extracellular receptors, with LRRsearch surpassing LRRfinder in the case of plant NLRs (Figure 4b).

As also can be seen from Figure 4b, in comparison to Interpro and the two predictors mentioned above, LRRpredictor covers far larger regions of LRR domains with coverage percentages (CP) exceeding 60% and almost complete coverage in over 50% in all six groups (Figure 4b). It is interesting to note that Interpro annotation of extracellular LRR domains also include the N-terminal cap region, that is not formally a LRR repeat. This results in the fact that LRRpredictor covers in most cases only ≈90% of this domain, instead of 100% as in NLR groups (Figure 4b).

Predicted Repeats Consensus in Each Class

Further, the amino acid composition of the predicted LRR motifs was investigated solely on the 'core' predicted LRR repeats, i.e., repeats that are flanked by other predicted repeats within a 15-35 aa range. In short, the results presented below clearly indicate that LRRpredictor is able to detect and reproduce all the consensus motifs previously defined for well-studied classes of RLKs, NLRs, and TLRs ( Figure 5). This is especially the case for vertebrate NLRs. The consensus follows the ribosomal inhibitor (RI) type -'x -3 xxL 0 xxL 3 xL 5 xx(N/C) 8 xL 10 xxxgoxxLxxoLxx' [14,65], with position '-3' being less relevant for this class of repeats. Additionally, the vertebrate TLRs predicted motif consensus matches the "T" type motif: L -3 xxL 0 xxL 3 xL 5 xxN 8 xL 10 xxL 13 xxxx(F/L) 18 xxL 21 xx defined in Matushima et al. classification [13] rather than the less encountered "S" type motif: L -3 xxL 0 xxL 3 xL 5 xxN 8 xL 10 xxL 13 Px(x)LPxx.

In the case of plant extracellular receptors, the predicted motifs from RLK plant and RLP plant groups show a prolonged pattern that is in perfect agreement with the plant-specific (PS) type from Kobe and Kajava classification [14,65]-L -3 xxL 0 xxL 3 xL 5 xxN 8 xL 10 (S/T) 11 GxIPxxLxxLGx. Interestingly, the kinase containing receptors (RLK) have a more prominent consensus ( Figure 5).

On the other hand, the predicted motifs in plant NLRs comprising the CNL plant and TNL plant groups display a remote similarity with the cysteine-containing (CC) type as defined by Kobe and Kajava classification [14,65]:

"(C/L) -3 xxL 0 xxL 3 xL 5 xxC 8 xxITDxxOxxL(A/G) xx"-where O is any nonpolar residue. While the extended motif is satisfied (16 aa), a difference worth noting is that in both CNL and TNL groups cysteine is rare in position '-3' and outside this region any similarity with CC-type ends. Both plant NLR groups mainly confine their consensus to only the minimal L 0 xxL 3 xL 5 motif, with TNL extending it a little bit with C 8 position. By contrast, in plant extracellular receptors the consensus expands beyond the 16 amino acids of the 'extended' region covering all the four sides of the LRR solenoid. Despite being analogous in composition, the TNL plant group consensus is more pronounced, especially at positions C 8 and L 11 ( Figure 5).

In all six classes L 0 , L 3 , and L 5 of minimal motif are as expected overwhelmingly hydrophobic, with all three positions occupied by leucine in around 50% of the cases, except CNLs where leucine occurrence seems less stringent ( Figure 6). When compared to the Kobe and Kajava classification, the majority of the motifs fall under the expected class and very few cross terms are seen between them ( Figure 6).

While the extended motif is satisfied (16 aa), a difference worth noting is that in both CNL and TNL groups cysteine is rare in position '-3' and outside this region any similarity with CC-type ends. Both plant NLR groups mainly confine their consensus to only the minimal L0xxL3xL5 motif, with TNL extending it a little bit with C8 position. By contrast, in plant extracellular receptors the consensus expands beyond the 16 amino acids of the 'extended' region covering all the four sides of the LRR solenoid. Despite being analogous in composition, the TNLplant group consensus is more pronounced, especially at positions C8 and L11 ( Figure 5). In all six classes L0, L3, and L5 of minimal motif are as expected overwhelmingly hydrophobic, with all three positions occupied by leucine in around 50% of the cases, except CNLs where leucine occurrence seems less stringent ( Figure 6). When compared to the Kobe and Kajava classification, the majority of the motifs fall under the expected class and very few cross terms are seen between them ( Figure 6).

CNLs and TNLs seem more dispersed even on a shorter 11 amino acid window consensus (W11), while the extracellular receptors obey in over 60% of the cases the corresponding W11 pattern that is shared simultaneous by all three classes ( Figure 6). [14] predicted with LRRpredictor across the six receptor classes. As the motif consensuses from KK classification were very strict, we adapted these consensuses to different sequences windows (W6, W11, W16, or more) centered around the minimal motif as shown in the table. Percentages of the predicted motifs compatible with each consensus are shown with grey bars.

LRR Motifs Variability Across Classes

Sequence variability is of critical importance for LRR domain function and in contrast to their common structural pattern, a wide spread in the sequence space is expected. To assess this, we analyzed the extended motifs, predicted by LRRpredictor, both the intra-and inter-group sequence similarity. This was performed over subsets of randomly selected 1000 examples of 'core' (L) motifs from each group. We selected as similarity measure a metric distance function [57] derived from BLOSUM scores which reflect the structural compatibility between amino acids, as described in Figure 6. Distribution of LRR motif types defined by Kobe and Kajava (KK) [14] predicted with LRRpredictor across the six receptor classes. As the motif consensuses from KK classification were very strict, we adapted these consensuses to different sequences windows (W6, W11, W16, or more) centered around the minimal motif as shown in the table. Percentages of the predicted motifs compatible with each consensus are shown with grey bars.

CNLs and TNLs seem more dispersed even on a shorter 11 amino acid window consensus (W11), while the extracellular receptors obey in over 60% of the cases the corresponding W11 pattern that is shared simultaneous by all three classes ( Figure 6).

LRR Motifs Variability Across Classes

Sequence variability is of critical importance for LRR domain function and in contrast to their common structural pattern, a wide spread in the sequence space is expected. To assess this, we analyzed the extended motifs, predicted by LRRpredictor, both the intra-and inter-group sequence similarity. This was performed over subsets of randomly selected 1000 examples of 'core' (L) motifs from each group. We selected as similarity measure a metric distance function [57] derived from BLOSUM scores which reflect the structural compatibility between amino acids, as described in Section 2. Using this metric, we calculated the distance between each predicted LRR motif from all groups and analyzed how these distances behave intra-and inter-groups.