Intra-group all-vs.-all distances distribution shows that the extracellular groups RLK, RLP from plants and TLRs from vertebrates form a denser group in terms of conservation, than plant and vertebrate NLRs (Figure 7a left). Figure 7b shows the silhouette coefficients. These scores show how separated two given clusters are, based on the distance between samples from each group, the maximal value of 1 corresponding to perfectly separated clusters, value 0 corresponds to clusters that coincide, while negative values with a minimum of -1 correspond to the case where samples from one group actually cluster better with the opposite group that is being compared. Silhouette coefficient of all versus all analyzed groups indicate that the NLR groups form a rather overlapping cluster, that has an increased variability among its sample motifs (i.e., expanded cluster) (Figure 7b left). Extracellular plant receptors RLK and RLP clusters are overlapping and have a more reduced span in terms of variability (i.e., more conserved motifs), while vertebrate TLR overlap plant RLK and RLP receptors have a slightly increased variability (Figure 7a,b left). Interestingly, within the minimal LRR motif region 'L 0 XXL 3 XL 5 ' there are no significant differences between groups (Figure 7a,b right).

To have an overall view on the sequence dispersion in each protein class containing LRR domains Figure 7c shows the 2D embedding of the high dimensional sequence space of both the extended and minimal motifs of each class. Nonetheless such a reduction gives only a rough representation of distance relations between clusters in the original space as the normalized stress parameter (stress-1) of this 2D embedding is 0.25 and 0.21 for the extended and minimal motif space, respectively [66].

LRRpredictor Specificity Tested on Solenoid Architectures

From a structural point of view the LRR protein architecture belongs to the larger class of solenoidal architectures which are defined by specific repeated structural patterns. Given the repetitiveness of such structures we asked if LRRpredictor is able to discriminate between LRR motifs and other repetitive sequence patterns. The main candidates considered for possible misclassifications are two classes of beta sheet repeat proteins-which are the closest structural To have an overall view on the sequence dispersion in each protein class containing LRR domains Figure 7c shows the 2D embedding of the high dimensional sequence space of both the extended and minimal motifs of each class. Nonetheless such a reduction gives only a rough representation of distance relations between clusters in the original space as the normalized stress parameter (stress-1) of this 2D embedding is 0.25 and 0.21 for the extended and minimal motif space, respectively [66].

LRRpredictor Specificity Tested on Solenoid Architectures

From a structural point of view the LRR protein architecture belongs to the larger class of solenoidal architectures which are defined by specific repeated structural patterns. Given the repetitiveness of such structures we asked if LRRpredictor is able to discriminate between LRR motifs and other repetitive sequence patterns. The main candidates considered for possible misclassifications are two classes of beta sheet repeat proteins-which are the closest structural relatives of LRR domains: pectate lyases (PeLs) and trimeric LpxA architectures and two helical repetitive classes: armadillo and ankiryin architecture ( Figure A2b). To this end, 50 sequences from each of the above four classes annotated as such by Interpro were randomly selected from UniRef50. Figure A2a shows the probabilities returned by LRRpredictor that the potential motifs occurring in the 200 sequences are true LRR structural motifs. As can be seen in all four classes taken into account, the vast majority of potential motifs have a probability lower than 10% to be true motifs. Only 0.1% of such sites show a probability between 10% and 20% to be true motifs and none of these sites reaches a threshold of 40% for being a true LRR motif ( Figure A2a). From a technical point of view this result shows that LRRpredictor is highly specific for LRR domains.

On the other hand this result is even more interesting from a structural and biological point of view indicating that even if LRRs and PeLs were considered to be members of the same LRR superfamily [67] the structural principles upon which they are built are different and presumably the two classes have diverged very early in evolution.

Discussion

Given the high number of indeterminacies generated by sequence variability, a proper annotation of LRR motifs and the correct delineation of repeats is critical in identifying potential protein-protein interaction sites of LRR domains.

Here, we show that LRRpredictor is able to address this problem and by this, can be of use as a new tool in the analysis of especially plant NLR sequences that display a larger variability and irregularity as compared to other LRR domains [9,68]. This often results in the superposition or presence in less than a minimal repeat distance of potential alternative LRR motifs, as can be seen from Figure 8 illustrating such indeterminacies found on a 150 amino acid stretch from the potato CNL Gpa2 LRR domain. were considered to be members of the same LRR superfamily [67] the structural principles upon which they are built are different and presumably the two classes have diverged very early in evolution.

Discussion

Given the high number of indeterminacies generated by sequence variability, a proper annotation of LRR motifs and the correct delineation of repeats is critical in identifying potential protein-protein interaction sites of LRR domains.

Here, we show that LRRpredictor is able to address this problem and by this, can be of use as a new tool in the analysis of especially plant NLR sequences that display a larger variability and irregularity as compared to other LRR domains [9,68]. This often results in the superposition or presence in less than a minimal repeat distance of potential alternative LRR motifs, as can be seen from Figure 8 illustrating such indeterminacies found on a 150 amino acid stretch from the potato CNL Gpa2 LRR domain. Given the scarcity of structural learning data consisting of less than 180 LRR structures with lower than 90% identity and only ≈850 motifs at hand in ID50 (<50% identity), in order to maximize LRRpredictor extrapolation abilities, the method was set to rely on aggregating a collection of eight classifiers based on different strategies, two of them designed to perform a massive oversampling of the real data ( Figure 2).

In this context, LRRpredictor shows to perform well, with overall precision, recall, and F1 scores ranging between 85% and 97% on both test and cross validation sets (Figure 3a). In addition, LRRpredictor increases its performances when taking into account only the 'core' repeats (L), as the main prediction problems relate only to the N-'entry' repeats (N)-i.e., the first repeat of the LRR Figure 8. LRR motif and repeat indeterminacies onto a 150 aa stretch in Gpa2 potato NLR. Potential motifs that follow the minimal 'LxxLxL' pattern (where L is any hydrophobic amino acid) are illustrated above the sequence with black bars and yellow highlight, while LRRpredictor results are shown above with blue bars.

Given the scarcity of structural learning data consisting of less than 180 LRR structures with lower than 90% identity and only ≈850 motifs at hand in ID50 (<50% identity), in order to maximize LRRpredictor extrapolation abilities, the method was set to rely on aggregating a collection of eight classifiers based on different strategies, two of them designed to perform a massive oversampling of the real data ( Figure 2).

In this context, LRRpredictor shows to perform well, with overall precision, recall, and F1 scores ranging between 85% and 97% on both test and cross validation sets (Figure 3a). In addition, LRRpredictor increases its performances when taking into account only the 'core' repeats (L), as the main prediction problems relate only to the N-'entry' repeats (N)-i.e., the first repeat of the LRR domain (Figure 3a, Table A1). This can be explained in part by the increased irregularity of the sequence in this region, but also by the small sample size of the N-'entry' (N) motifs when compared to the 'core' (L) motifs.

It is also important to note here the fact that false positives are almost never found in nonLRR domains but always in proteins containing LRR domains (Table A1). Here, such false positives shape up in close vicinity to the marginal repeats-where the LRR motif characteristics are more diffuse, or in linkers or different domains neighboring the LRR, but found in a 'one repeat range' to the N-entry motif.

Other false predictions are caused by alignment artefacts. These yield to an offset of 1-3 amino acids in the predicted LRR motif starting position. Alignment artefacts are also frequently seen in regions with high beta structure propensity of insertion loops or 'islands' protruding from the LRR domain structures. This is mainly due to the fact that the multiple alignment on which PSSM relies forces the protruding loop in the queried sequence to align to regular repeats in the template LRRs of the database.

Unfortunately, the number of such insertion loops or 'islands' is so small in ID90/ID50 that estimators cannot learn from the existing data to discriminate such false positives. Thus, only careful structural analysis performed in later modelling stages can handle such cases.