Results on both cross-validation and test sets show that estimators using structural features in addition to the sequence based features (C5-C8) perform on average only slightly better compared to those sequence based only (C1-C4), with some interesting improvements on F1 scores (Figure 3b). This only marginal improvement may indicate that RaptorX-Property [34] training on the overall structural database that might have marginally overlapped with our testing dataset did not affect the results. Nevertheless, C5-C8 are expected to be better extrapolators (Table A1), while the structural predictions on which (C5-C8) are based, and that are present in the output file can prove instrumental in further dealing with ambiguous cases where two LRR motif signatures partially superpose or are within the limit of a repeat. Figures 3c and 4b compare predictions of three existing engines. LRRpredictor outperforms LRRsearch [27] and LRRfinder [26]. This is expected as the two previous methods were designed to focus mainly on specific LRR classes such as vertebrate TLRs or NLRs, respectively, while LRRpredictor relies on a newer larger dataset and was designed to identify LRR motifs in general. However, despite focusing on specific protein classes, both LRRsearch and LRRfinder show comparable efficiency in covering annotated LRR domains in plant extracellular receptors but decreased capabilities on plant NLRs (CNLs and TNLs) (Figure 4b).

Furthermore, both LRRsearch and LRRfinder were intended for fast computation and they use a predefined PSSM matrix computed on a curated collection of LRR domains, instead of performing case by case basis sequence profiles as our method does.

However, the increased performance of LRRpredictor comes with an attached computational cost and is not easily scalable for scanning large protein sequences databases such UniprotKB. The main reason for this is that generating case by case sequence profiles and performing predictions for each estimator aggregated in LRRpredictor is more computationally demanding than LRRfinder and LRRsearch workflow.

Another matter of concern was related to the phyla bias of the database on which LRRpredictor relies, as ≈50% of ID90 have mammalian origin while the share of mammalian-from total-annotated LRRs in UniRef50 is only 2% (Figure 1c). Moreover, groups such as plant NLRs are extremely poorly represented, as only very recently the first plant NLR structure was reported [21,22].

In this context, in order to investigate the extrapolation capabilities of LRRpredictor we used a set of LRR domains annotated in Interpro collection from the six most representative immune receptor classes: R-proteins and extracellular receptors from flowering plants (CNL plants , TNL plants , RLK plants , RLP plants ) and their vertebrate counterparts (NLR vert , TLR vert ). The LRR motifs predicted by LRRpredictor show a good coverage of the LRR domains annotated by Interpro and follow the expected repeat length distribution for all these six classes [14,65] (Figure 4a,b). Moreover, the predicted motifs reproduce the expected LRR motif consensus of each protein class ( Figure 5) from Kobe and Kajava classification [14,65]. Combined, these indicate that LRRpredictor is able to extrapolate well in different LRR motif classes which is especially important for plant NLRs.

Analysis of LRRpredictor detected motifs showed clear differences between the six classes within the extended 16 aa motif. Whether variation in these extended motifs directly relate to the functional diversification of the different receptor classes still remains to be addressed. By contrast, within the minimal 6 aa LRR motif region-L 0 XXL 3 XL 5 -there are no significant differences between the six groups ( Figure 7). This might suggest a common root of minimal structural criteria imposed by the solenoidal architecture from which the six classes have diverged to fulfil specific tasks in specific environments. For receptor function, such a solenoidal domain organization in which only three positions over a ≈25 repeat length are loosely conserved has two-fold evolutionary advantages: first the solenoid architecture ensures a large solvent exposed surface area [10] and second a high sequence variability can be achieved without disturbing the tertiary structure.

The increased conservation seen at the level of the extended motif among all three extracellular LRR classes-plant RLK, RLP and vertebrate TLRs-when compared to plant and vertebrate NLRs could be related to N-glycosylation and the constraints imposed by the extracellular environment. On the one hand, plant NLRs recognize directly or indirectly a suite of pathogen effectors or (perturbations) of their host targets conferring host specific immunity. Single amino acid changes in the effector can already be detected or are sufficient to evade recognition by a NLR, resulting in a co-evolutionary arms race between pathogen effectors and host immune receptor [69,70]. In contrast, extracellular LRRs recognize often conserved microbial patterns to confer basal immunity thus lacking such a strong driver for diversification [71]. Vertebrate NLRs act more like basal immune receptors in innate immunity, recognizing conserved microbe-associated molecular patterns (MAMPs). The greater diversifying selection imposed by fast-evolving effectors may therefore account for the co-evolution of structurally highly variable LRR motifs in plant NLRs. In the future, it will be interesting to relate our LRR structural annotations to specific functional NLR sub-classes. This is relevant, for instance, as some plant NLRs-types are described to have a downstream 'helper' function rather than a role as a canonical 'sensor'.

Another aspect is that LRR domains in plant NLRs have a dual role. They not only contribute to pathogen recognition, but also negatively regulate the switch function [72]. Hence, it will be interesting to link LRR structural annotations to specific intramolecular domain interactions between LRRs and other NLR subdomains to better understand the co-evolution of protein domains in NLRs. It is shown that subtle mutations in the interface between LRR and NB-ARC can have a major effect on NLR functioning, often resulting in constitutive immune activation or a complete loss-of-function [17,72]. This shows the tight link between structural and functional constraints underlying the shaping of NLRs in plants. Additionally, the link between LRR structural annotations and complex formation with other host proteins will be interesting to assess. LRR domains are known to interact with other components like chaperones (e.g., SGT1) which are required for proper NLR folding and functioning [73], or kinases (e.g., ZED1, RKS1) [21,22,74] but also NLR hetero-and homodimers are often formed [9,75,76] which could impose additional structural constraints on the shape and irregularity of LRR domains in plant NLRs.

Conclusions

The results presented herein indicate that LRRpredictor shows a good performance on the available 3D data and good extrapolation capabilities on plant NLRs (CNL/TNL), which are poorly represented in the training dataset. Predicted LRR repeats using LRRpredictor significantly increase the coverage of Interpro annotated LRR domains from main immune receptors groups. In addition, these predicted repeats are consistent with previously defined motif consensuses from all studied groups and also follow the repeat length range specific to each class. In conclusion, LRRpredictor is a tool worth using in research topics related to understanding immune receptors functions and structure-informed strategies for pathogen control technologies. loss of samples (left) and increase in entropy (right) at different identity thresholds. Displayed is the Shannon entropy averaged over the 16 amino acid extended motif. (b) Composition of LRR motif types: N-entry (N), core (L), and C-exit (C) LRR motifs in the initial set (ID90) and in the 50% identity trimmed dataset (ID50). (c) LRR repeat length distribution at different identity thresholds. C-exit motifs were not used. (d) Structural superposition of the LRR repeats from a plant NLR, vertebrate NLR, plant RLK and vertebrate TLR structures [22,[77][78][79] (from left to right). Hydrophobic positions of the minimal 'L0xxL3xL5' motif are shown in orange and position N8 in purple. Table A1.

Detailed performance analysis on LRRpredictor and its classifiers. Precision recall and F1 scores are shown for in-sample (i.e., training data) and out-of-sample data (i.e., test data that was not used in training), for both cross-validation and test phase. In the cross-validation stage, classifiers were trained on three of the cross-validation (CV) sets and tested on the fourth set in an iterative manner, while in testing stage, classifiers were trained on all four CV sets and evaluated on the test set left aside from the beginning. The counts for true-negatives (TN), false-positives (FP), false-negative (FN), and true-positive (TP) within each set are also shown. As marginal repeats (N-entry and C-exit types) have a lower detection rate, also included is the recall calculated only with respect to 'core' repeats (L), indicated with blue font. Performance scores shading is according to a value based colormap from yellow (0.75) to blue (1.00).

Dataset Classifier

In