Knock-down of odr-3 and ife-2 additively extends lifespan and healthspan in C. elegans Published: September 9, 2021

Ioan Valentin Matei Systems Biology of Aging Group Institute of Biochemistry of the Romanian Academy BucharestRomania

Vimbai Netsai Charity Samukange Systems Biology of Aging Group Institute of Biochemistry of the Romanian Academy BucharestRomania

Gabriela Bunu Systems Biology of Aging Group Institute of Biochemistry of the Romanian Academy BucharestRomania

Dmitri Toren Systems Biology of Aging Group Institute of Biochemistry of the Romanian Academy BucharestRomania

The Shraga Segal Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Genetics Center for Multidisciplinary Research on Aging Ben-Gurion University of the Negev Beer-ShevaIsrael

Simona Ghenea gheneas@biochim.ro Systems Biology of Aging Group Institute of Biochemistry of the Romanian Academy BucharestRomania

Robi Tacutu robi.tacutu@gmail.com Systems Biology of Aging Group Institute of Biochemistry of the Romanian Academy BucharestRomania

Knock-down of odr-3 and ife-2 additively extends lifespan and healthspan in C. elegans 1317Published: September 9, 2021Received: June 11, 2021 Accepted: August 24, 202121040 AGING Research Paper *Equal contribution Correspondence to: Simona Ghenea, Robi Tacutu;lifespan extensiongenetic interventionssynergismife-2odr-3 Genetic manipulations can ameliorate the aging process and extend the lifespan of model organisms. The aim of this research was to identify novel genetic interventions that promote both lifespan and healthspan, by combining the effects of multiple longevity-associated gene inactivations in C. elegans. For this, the individual and combined effects of the odr-3 mutation and of ife-2 and cku-70 knock-downs were studied, both in the wild type and daf-16 mutant backgrounds. We found that besides increasing the lifespan of wild type animals, the knock-down of ife-2 (starting at L4) also extends the lifespan and healthspan of long-lived odr-3 mutants. In the daf-16 background, ife-2 and odr-3 impairment exert opposing effects individually, while the daf-16; odr-3; ife-2 deficient animals show a similar lifespan and healthspan as daf-16, suggesting that the odr-3 and ife-2 effector outcomes converge downstream of DAF-16. By contrast, cku-70 knock-down did not extend the lifespan of single or double odr-3; ife-2 inactivated animals, and was slightly deleterious to healthspan.

In conclusion, we report that impairment of odr-3 and ife-2 increases lifespan and healthspan in an additive and synergistic manner, respectively, and that this result is not improved by further knocking-down cku-70.www.aging-us.com 21041 AGING expression levels in long-lived species[11,12], overall suggesting that some of the reported longevityassociated interventions could have therapeutic implications even in humans.

INTRODUCTION

The aging process might be defined by the progressive loss of viability and by an increase in fragility and vulnerability [1,2]. This in turn, results in a huge health-related cost for the elderly and a dramatic growth in the mortality rate. Understanding the mechanisms underlying aging is one of the major biological and biomedical challenges of our society, and could result in high dividends if the society would gain the capacity to extend lifespan, and more importantly healthspan (i.e. the interval of healthy, productive life years) [3][4][5]. Although there is still much debate about the molecular causes of aging, the general consensus in the field is that aging is malleable, and studies in model organisms have already shown that aging can be manipulated by both genetic and environmental factors [6][7][8]. Up until now, more than 2,200 single-gene interventions have been reported to modulate lifespan in model organisms [9]. Most of these genes have been found through genetic interventions, including partial or full loss-offunction mutations, RNA-induced gene silencing, gene over-expression, and genetic polymorphisms, which were reported to promote longevity or cause a premature aging phenotype [9].

More importantly, it has been shown that a large part of these genes play a conserved role as longevity regulators across diverse taxa [10], and some of them even share similar gene The effect on the mean and/or maximum lifespan of the modified organisms ranges from very modest values (5-10% change) up to very high values, for well-established longevity-associated genes -for example, two-fold for daf-2 in worms [13], six-fold for SIR2 in yeast [14], and even ten-fold for age-1 in worms [15]. Genetic modifications have been identified even in mammals, albeit the observed effects so far seem to be smaller (up to a maximum of 50%) [9]. These works have significantly increased our knowledge about the genetics of aging and longevity in model organisms, and they should be followed by investigations into the effect of epistatic, or more precisely synergistic gene combinations on lifespan. This aspect, however, has been unfortunately less popular, mainly because the epistasis between longevity-associated genes, and between the pathways they are involved in, is complex and most often non-linear [16,17], thus requiring much time and resources to be studied.

In a recent paper, describing the SynergyAge database, we have defined three types of synergism, applied to the general case of N genetic interventions: 1) full synergism, in which lifespan values are known for all intermediary strains that contain any combination of the N interventions and the lifespan change for the n-mutant is greater than the sum of lifespan changes for any two intermediary k-mutant and (N-k)-mutant, 2) simple synergism, in which lifespan values are known for the final strain (N interventions) and for all single gene interventions, but not for all intermediary k-mutants, and in which the lifespan effect of the N-gene combination is greater than the sum of all the individual effects, and 3) partially known synergism, in which values are available only for an incrementally built model and for all genetic interventions in an Nsequence an increase in lifespan is observed [18].

The few seminal discoveries regarding longevity synergism generally include the well known IIF/FOXO pathway and the daf-2/daf-16 genes, and have been started in C. elegans [6,19,20]. The SynergyAge database reports 62 synergistic combinations of prolongevity interventions that include daf-2. Interestingly, based on SynergyAge data, we did not observe a general correlation between the strength of the longevity effect in WT with those in the long-lived daf-2 mutant. For example, RNAi of let-363 did not extend the lifespan of the daf-2(mu150) mutant [21], even though the two genes have the 2nd and 3rd largest increase of lifespan in WT (according to GenAge). sod-2, another important longevity-associated gene, whose deletion leads to a lifespan increase in WT, does not further extend the lifespan of daf-2 mutants [22]. Moreover, three of the top daf-2 enhancers have only a small effect in WT, when kept under same conditions as in the daf-2 background: clk-1 increases lifespan by only 1.18% compared to WT at 25° C [23] even though at this temperature extends daf-2 lifespan by 205%; rsks-1 increases lifespan of daf-2 by 106%, but only by 20% in the WT [24]; drp-1, which potentiates the effect of daf-2 by 73%, increases lifespan of WT by only 2% [25]; clk-2 increases daf-2 effect by +113% while in the WT the effect is limited to 68% [26].

In our study, the genes to be tested were selected based on several bioinformatic criteria (potential of being longevity enhancers for the daf-2 knock-down, genes being part of individual clusters in a cross-database interactome, number of shared KEGG pathways, chromosome positions, etc. ), followed by manual curation and evaluation (of scientific literature) for the short-listed gene combinations.

In mammals, the homologues of daf-2 and daf-16 are components of the mammalian insulin and insulin growth factor (IGF) signal transduction cascade (IIS) [27][28][29]. DAF-2 regulates endocrine responses to food availability, including longevity, dauer formation, and fat metabolism [13,30,31]. Mutations that reduce the function of DAF-2 extend lifespan through a mechanism that greatly depends on the activity of DAF-16 [32,33]. In addition to the central role in integrating signals from insulin/insulin-like pathways, DAF-16 integrates signals from multiple upstream pathways to regulate various biological processes [34]. Due to the increased amount of data on daf-2 and daf-16 mutants, it is extremely appealing to search for genetic interventions that act synergistically amongst themselves, but also with the daf-2 long-lived background. In this study, three such genes have been considered: odr-3, ife-2 and cku-70.