Resistance to stress declines with age after early adulthood [53], and the loss of protein homeostasis together with the failure to activate cellular stress responses are among the earliest aging marks [54]. Elevated temperatures perturb the protein homeostasis due to accumulation of defective proteins, whereas production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and H2O2 increase global cellular damage. Both insults activate the cellular stress responses, aiming to improve cellular fitness and organismal recovery. To find if the double intervention in odr-3 and ife-2 perturbs the stress response mechanisms, we monitored survival upon exposure to oxidative stress and acute heat stress. We induced oxidative stress by treatment with either paraquat, which generates reactive oxygen species, or NaN3, which generates H2O2. Both treatments dramatically reduce survival of WT animals by more than 50% (Figure 5A, 5B). In contrast, mutation in the odr-3 increases survival of the animals treated with both paraquat and NaN3 compared with treated WT, although not statistically significant for NaN3. ife-2 mutants exhibited an increased survival upon both treatments, as previously reported [42]. The odr-3; ife-2 double mutants were less sensitive to ROS and H2O2 toxicity than WT animals, but they did not show an additive effect when compared with single mutants ( Figure 5A, 5B).

Exposure to 35° C for 4h decreases the survival rate of WT animals by more than 50% ( Figure 5C). Whereas the heat shock slightly increased the survival of odr-3 mutants, compared with WT (not statistically significant), it did not also affect the survival of ife-2 mutants or odr-3; ife-2 double mutants ( Figure 5C), overall indicating that impairment of odr-3 and/or ife-2 do not affect the heat stress response. Some genetic or non-genetic interventions that extend lifespan also reduce fecundity, implying a trade-off between longevity and reproduction [55][56][57]. We did not observe such an effect for odr-3 and ife-2 single and double mutants ( Figure 5D). Thus, the reproductive period and the age of the peak egg-laying rate of single and double mutants coincided with that of WT animals ( Figure 5D). Moreover, the brood size of the mutants is similar to that of WT animals ( Figure 5E). In conclusion, simultaneous depletion of odr-3 and ife-2 extends lifespan without affecting fecundity, promotes muscle activity and maintains activation of stress response mechanisms, consistent with increased health.

DISCUSSION

Longevity is regulated by a combination of genetic and non-genetic factors, such as environmental interactions and lifestyle. The identification of genetic mutations that extend lifespan in model organisms has shown that longevity is mainly regulated by a complex interplay between many signaling pathways that affect cellular functions as diverse as nutrient sensing, genome stability, mitochondria fitness, organelle proteostasis, intercellular communication, transcription, proliferation and cellular regeneration [58,59]. Previously, we have successfully used network-based approaches, building upon the list of known longevity-associated genes hosted in the GenAge database [9], to predict novel genetic or drug interventions that extend lifespan [60,61]. However, due to the existence of complex and intricate interactions between hundreds of longevityassociated genes [62][63][64], the lifespan modulation obtained with these methods was limited by how much a single gene can influence longevity. While combined genetic interventions that modulate longevity via parallel pathways or drugs targeting multiple evolutionary conserved aging pathways have been shown in many instances to extend lifespan [65], the number of gene combinations tested so far has not been very high [18]. Here, we assessed the effects on both lifespan and healthspan, given by the simultaneous inactivation of three genes: odr-3, ife-2 and cku-70.

By reporting on the synergy of the pro-longevity effects of IFE-2 and ODR-3, and at the same time on the lack of synergy between CKU-70 and the above two genes, we hope that the current work will add to the accumulating data on longevity-related gene combinations, which could be used in future predictions of complex, multigene interventions.

According to the SynergyAge database http://synergyage.info/ [18], the above-mentioned genetic interventions were among the most promising in terms of lifespan extension, when combined with IISdefective daf-2 mutants [39,42,46], a highly desirable property. SynergyAge hosts 133 unique synergistic interactions, involving 108 genes and of these, 62 gene combinations include daf-2. Much less combinations are antagonistic (32 gene combinations) while for 156 gene combinations the effect is somewhere between the two individual effects. Although this summary does not provide information on the number of negative results (which would probably be classified in one of the last 2 categories) it gives a sense of the scarcity of synergistic interactions discovered so far -considering the total number of potential gene combinations that could encompass for example the 889 worm longevityassociated genes from GenAge [9] (even for two gene combinations).

In C. elegans, ODR-3, IFE-2 and CKU-70 have different functions, and although inactivation of each of them extends lifespan, the mechanisms by which this occurs are at least partially different from each other. In our study, the lifespan and healthspan assays were carried out for all these 3 genes and their combinations. As a result, we obtained a clear perspective of the lifespan and healthspan changes from all worm strains, which is represented in Figure 2 and Supplementary  Figure 4, respectively. Using this representation, it can be easily observed that the odr-3; ife-2 double inactivation leads to an additive increase (i.e. the effect of the joint interventions is equal to the sum of the individual effects) in lifespan compared with single gene inactivations (Figure 2), as well as a synergistic effect on healthspan (Supplementary Figure 4). On the other hand, cku-70 down regulation does not significantly affect the lifespan of ife-2 mutants ( Figure  1C) and is detrimental to the long-lived odr-3 and odr-3; ife-2 strains ( Figure 1B, 1D). This detrimental effect is not seen in the daf-16 mutants, where the loss of both odr-3 and daf-16 seems to be dominant compared to the influence of cku-70 downregulation ( Figure 1F). It is difficult to explain the effect of cku-70 down regulation on odr-3 and odr-3; ife-2 only through its function in the DNA repair process.

In addition to its role in DNA repair, the conserved Ku heterodimer was found to participate in other cellular processes such as transcriptional regulation, apoptosis, DNA replication, RNA metabolism and other [66,67]. Therefore, a more complex interaction between cku-70, odr-3 and ife-2 might exist.

In our experiments we double inactivated ife-2 and cku-70 by RNAi. This raises the possibility that the knockdown efficiency of one or both genes could be reduced to half. For this reason, for an appropriate comparison with single RNAi down regulation we exposed the worms to a half concentration of dsRNA by mixing RNAi clone with EV clone. Unfortunately, we could not verify by quantitative PCR the efficiency of AGING ife-2 RNAi down regulation, which gave us the most notable effect, because the DNA fragment used for expression of dsRNA from L4440 vector encompasses the full gene (ORF and UTR) and due to the uptake of dsRNA in the cells, the endogenous ife-2 mRNA cannot be distinguished and targeted for PCR amplification. However, knock down of ife-2 RNAi; EV increased the lifespan of odr-3 mutants, suggesting efficient down regulation even with half concentration of ife-2 dsRNA. We have to point out that in the case of double RNAi there is a possibility that worms are not equally exposed to both dsRNA, and down regulation of one or both genes might be less efficient. Hence, although single downregulation of cku-70 RNAi gave only a very modest increase of lifespan, the effect of double inactivation ife-2(RNAi; cku-70(RNAi) should be considered with care.

The increased lifespan of odr-3; ife-2 might be simply explained by the combined effect of two genes acting in distinct pathways. However, since the daf-16 mutation is epistatic to the odr-3 mutation and greatly reduces the lifespan of ife-2 knock-down animals, a more complex interaction is also possible. ODR-3 is expressed in 5 pairs of sensory neurons. In the AWA and AWC neurons, ODR-3 functions in perception and transduction of odor signals [37], in ADF and ASH mediates gustatory plasticity and detection of nociceptive stimuli, respectively [37,68], whereas in AWC neurons is involved in temperature sensing [69]. Among these neurons, only AWA and AWC neurons were found to modulate lifespan [36], therefore it is thought that ODR-3 regulates longevity by functioning in these neurons. However, ODR-3 has a role in modulating the adaptive behavior to different stimuli by adjusting the levels of second messenger cGMP in response to environmental cues. We found that WT C. elegans grown on OP50 and HT115 diets have similar lifespans (20.6 mean lifespan on HT115 vs. 19.9 mean lifespan on OP50), indicating an efficient adaptive response of WT animals to these bacterial diets, as previously reported [70,71].