In contrast, odr-3(n1605) mutants have an increased lifespan on HT115 diet (26% increase in mean lifespan on HT115 diet, comparative to 7.5% increase of mean lifespan on OP50 diet), which implicates ODR-3 in metabolic adaptation as it was found in the case of other metabolic genes [70,71]. IFE-2 is expressed in all soma cells, including neurons [42]. The most pronounced lifespan and healthspan extension of odr-3; ife-2 animals was observed when ife-2 was down regulated by RNAi. Since RNAi interference is known to affect all tissues of the WT animals with the exception of neurons, these findings raise the possibility that non-neuronal silencing of ife-2 by RNAi might be primarily responsible for the improved healthspan and extended longevity of the odr-3; ife-2(RNAi) animals. Alternatively, impaired protein synthesis in neurons due to ife-2 deficiency might be detrimental to nematode health by affecting neuronal proteostasis [72]. Growing evidence unravels an important role for cell non-autonomous regulation of proteostasis in aging in which neuronal activation of stress response pathways such as heat shock response, mitochondrial and ER unfolded protein responses regulate nematode longevity by modulating cellular proteostasis in distal cells [73,74].

DAF-16 stabilizes the transcriptome against the proteostasis collapse during aging by controlling the activity of hundreds of genes, integrating inputs from the DAF-2 pathway and from pathways that appear to regulate lifespan independently of DAF-2 [34,75]. Therefore, the genetic interaction between odr-3, ife-2 and daf-16 could take many forms. In our experiments, although ife-2 inactivation increased the lifespan of daf-16(mu86) mutants, a result that is in accordance with a previous report [42], it did not extend the lifespan beyond that of WT controls. We found that in contrast to odr-3 mutation, which weakly activates DAF-16 in posterior intestine, down regulation of ife-2 does not induce DAF-16 nuclear translocalization, implying that DAF-16 activity is not directly modulated by IFE-2. Both DAF-16 and IFE-2 could affect common processes such as metabolic remodeling and maintenance of cellular proteostasis that modulate longevity. Several metabolic changes were identified as fingerprints for long-lived mutants including the shift from carbon to amino acid catabolism as an alternative energy source, upregulation of lipid storage, increased purine metabolism and increased trehalose stores [43,76,77]. Many of these processes were found to be regulated in a DAF-16-dependent manner [75,[78][79][80][81]. In mev-1 mutants, which lack succinate dehydrogenase cytochrome b, depletion of ife-2 induces stress resistance but also restores WT lifespan [42].

A metabolomic study revealed that ife-2 deficiency does not revert the mitochondrial mev-1 defects, but rather restores the catabolism of purine nucleotides (e.g. GMP and AMP) and the metabolism of very long-chain fatty acids (VLFA) [82], processes related to peroxisomes. Since beta-oxidation of VLFA is a source of reactive oxygen species, and peroxisomes are sensitive to increased oxidative stress, ife-2 depletion could also protect peroxisomes from oxidative stress, hence ameliorating peroxisomal function.

We found that the odr-3; ife-2 double mutants are less sensitive to induced ROS or H2O2, however a relationship between this and the additive/synergistic nature of the combined intervention cannot be directly AGING inferred. First, it was previously shown that stress resistance and lifespan can be experimentally dissociated and the magnitudes of changes in these two parameters produced by mutations are not identical [83]. Second, while it might be intuitive to suggest that the lack of additivity in the oxidative stress defence could mean the two genetic interventions activate the same mechanism, this is highly speculative, and small added differences in stress resistance could in fact affect longevity non linearly.

We also found that the decrease of motility and pharyngeal pumping, which decline in an age-related manner, were delayed in the odr-3; ife-2 mutants. As seen in Figure 4E Table 1), it suggests that animals remain healthy for a longer period, while the physiological decline that occurs during the advanced stage of aging is seemingly unaffected. Using an analogy to the socio-economic implications in a human population (if such an intervention could be translatable), such a therapy would probably not reduce the healthcare costs during late senescence, however it would increase the Healthy Life Years (HLY) indicator, which is a measure of productivity during life and an important economic factor.

Among the three genes that we investigated, the role of ife-2 in aging was the most comprehensively analyzed, so far. Thus, it was shown that the long-lived mutants, daf-2, age-1, let-363, clk-1, eat-2, dramatically extended the lifespan of ife-2 impaired animals [21,42]. There is limited information about interaction of odr-3 or cku-70 with other long-lived mutants. Both, odr-3(n1605) and cku-70RNAi extended the lifespan of daf-2(e1370) mutants [39,46]. We found that mutation in odr-3 extended the healthspan of ife-2 downregulated animals with a higher magnitude than it extended ife-2 lifespan, suggesting that the effect of odr-3 and ife-2 impairment may not be due to a role of these genes in the control of longevity per se, but rather a consequence of a longer healthspan due to amelioration of agerelated decline of physiological processes. This is supported by the observation that in contrast to eat-2 mutants which have reduced pharyngeal pumping, the odr-3; ife-2 animals exhibit a delay in the pharyngeal pumping decline, in older animals.

While much more work is probably needed to fully explore the mechanistic way in which the interaction between odr-3 and ife-2 modulates longevity, our results show that the knock-down of both odr-3 and ife-2 increases resistance to some types of stress and additively extends lifespan and healthspan.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Strains and culture conditions

The following strains used in this study were provided by the Caenorhabditis Genetic Center (CGC): C. elegans wild-type Bristol strain (N2), CX3222 odr-3(n1605)V, RB579 ife-2(ok306), CF1038 daf-16(mu86)I, OH16024 daf- 16(ot971 [daf-16::GFP])I, E. coli OP50 and HT115(DE3) strains. The C. elegans strains were maintained at 20° C using standard methods [84].

Multiple mutants were obtained by standard genetic methods and the presence of mutations was tested either by screening for characteristic phenotypes or via PCR genotyping. The homozygous odr-3(n1605) allele was confirmed by negative chemotaxis tests to isoamyl alcohol. To confirm the presence of homozygous daf-16(mu86) allele, high density populations were allowed dauer formation and subsequently tested for resistance to SDS 1%. Presence of ife-2(ok306) deletion was confirmed by PCR genotyping.

ife

2 and cku

70 RNAi

For the RNAi-mediated gene knock-down by feeding method, a slightly modified protocol of the Ahringer technique was used [85]. Briefly, bacteria were grown overnight in LB medium supplemented with 50 µg/ml ampicillin and seeded onto NGM plates supplemented with 25 µg/ml carbenicillin and 1 mM IPTG. The plates were kept at room temperature for two days before use. Several L4 hermaphrodites picked from plates seeded with OP50 were placed onto RNAi plates, transferred the next day to other fresh RNAi plates, allowed to lay eggs for 24 h, then removed. The L4 hermaphrodites developed from eggs laid onto RNAi plates were used for longevity and healthspan assays. For double RNAi experiments, the plates were prepared in a similar way, with the exception that the plates were seeded with a 1:1 mixture of both RNAi bacterial clones. The ife-2 and cku-70 RNAi clones were obtained from the Ahringer RNAi library (Source BioScience, Nottingham, UK); both clones were validated by sequencing. The HT115 bacteria transformed with the L4440 empty vector, HT115 (EV), was used as control for RNAi experiments unless otherwise specified. When ife-2; cku-70 double RNAi was employed, the control worms were grown on plates seeded with a 1:1 density mixture of HT115 (EV) bacteria and ife-2 or cku-70 RNAi clone, respectively, to maintain the same concentration of each double strand RNA as in the strains subjected to double RNAi.

AGING

Lifespan assays

Since the age at which a treatment is started can significantly influence the outcome [86], all worm cohorts used in this work have been age-synchronized (L4 larvae stage). For all RNAi experiments, agesynchronized L4 larvae were manually transferred to RNAi agar plates containing 15 µM 5-fluorodeoxyuridine (FUdR). For lifespan assays of mutant animals, age-synchronized L4 larvae were manually transferred to NGM plates, and seeded with OP50. In case of lifespan assays without FUdR, the worms were transferred to a new plate every day until they ceased laying eggs, then when needed. For mutant animals cultured with FUdR, a 15 µM FUdR concentration (same as in the RNAi experiments) was used. In all cases, worms were kept at 20° C and scored daily as dead or alive based on their response to a gentle touch with a wire. Worms that presented externalization of internal organs, died because of bagging, or crawled up the wall of the dish were censored. For RNAi experiments, the WT control and odr-3 animals were fed with HT115 (EV) bacteria. 85 worms were assayed per experiment.

While the lifespan assays were not conducted in a blinded manner, as suggested by Gruber et al., [87], the experiments were carried out by 3 operators, working with the data independently and results were evaluated for consistency. From the beginning of the study, all operators aimed to treat worm cohorts in an unbiased fashion and keep them in the same conditions.

Locomotion assay