Animals were scored for free movement and for a response to prodding with a wire, daily, during the lifespan assay until death. Worms were classified into three motion stages, based on ability to engage and coordinate the body wall muscle in a forward or backward movement according to a previously described method [88], with slight modifications. The three stages considered were: 1) state A, corresponding to a physiological, fully mobile state, which included animals that could move more than 0.5 cm (freely or upon prodding); 2) state B, representing impaired animals that responded to the prodding, but did not have enough strength to move more than 0.5 cm, and 3) state C, which encompassed animals in a frailty state that barely exhibited head or tail movements or twitches upon prodding.

Pharyngeal pumping assay

For the pharyngeal pumping assay, separate worm cohorts were cultured, in three independent experiments, each with 60 animals grown on FUdRsupplemented plates seeded with OP50 bacteria. Pumping was monitored and recorded at 1, 5, 10 and 15 days post-L4 moult by filming 13-15 randomly selected worms at each time point. Time lapse recordings were obtained on the Zeiss SteREO Discovery. V20 stereomicroscope (Carl Zeiss AG, Jena, Germany) using the AxioVs40 V4.8.2.0 software (Carl Zeiss AG), using the 1X Plan Apo S objective, at a magnification of 150X; the time lapse captures were converted into.mp4 files using an in-house developed script. Pharyngeal contractions were then accurately counted during a 30seconds interval. For each strain the average number of pharyngeal movements per minute, standard deviation and standard error of the mean were computed.

Stress assays and fecundity

Tolerance to heat and oxidative stress was tested for late L4 animals, since responses to both stresses become repressed early in adulthood (starting as early as 4 hours post L4) [89], suggesting that collapse of cellular stress response could represent an early molecular event in the aging process.

Heat stress assay

To obtain synchronized populations, five hermaphrodites were let to lay eggs for about two hours on three replicate plates. The larvae were reared at 20° C up to late L4 stage, shifted to 35° C for four hours, then returned to 20° C. The percentage of alive animals was scored 48 h later. More than 420 animals were tested for each strain in three individual experiments.

Oxidative stress assay

Tolerance to oxidative stress was tested by exposure to paraquat and NaN3. Both assays were essentially performed as previously described [42]. Briefly, synchronized L4 larvae were transferred to NGM plates containing 2 mM paraquat and survival was scored on day 5 of exposure. For NaN3 tolerance, synchronized L4 larvae were collected, washed with M9, incubated for one hour with 0.5 M freshly made NaN3 in M9, washed with M9 and placed on a NGM plate to recover. Survival rates were determined after 24 hours.

Brood size

To analyze the total brood size, L4 worms were placed on NGM plates seeded with OP50 and transferred every 12h to a new plate until they ceased laying eggs. The number of eggs laid by each worm was counted after removal of the parent.

DAF

16::GFP nuclear translocation

To verify DAF-16 activation we used the CRISPR allele of daf-16 tagged at the C-terminus with GFP [90]. Since AGING DAF-16 translocation from cytoplasm to nucleus is induced by heat stress and common drugs used to anesthetize the worms [91], the young adult worms were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde. The worms were grown at 20o C on RNAi plates, at L4 stage 15 µM FUdR was added and next day, the young adults were fixed and immediately visualized. Images were acquired with a Zeiss LSM 710 laser scanning confocal microscope using 10x objective, Argon 488 laser, and identical acquisition setting.

Statistical analysis

Comparisons between the lifespan values of different strains were carried out by analyzing Kaplan-Meier survival curves. For the statistical analysis and graphical representation of the curves, the R package "survival" was used (https://cran.r-project.org/package=survival).

For the statistical analysis of locomotion, animals were scored by motion stage and plotted as motility curves, similar to the lifespan curves, to evaluate the decline rate of motility in each strain. While in the survival analysis an event represents the death of one worm, in the locomotion analysis an event was defined as the transition between motility states, modeling the population dynamics from increased to low motility (Supplementary Figure 4). Since three motility categories exist, two different motility analyses were conducted, corresponding to two types of events: i) transitions from the mobile state A to either the impaired state B or to the frail state C, and ii) transitions from either state A or B to state C. In the manuscript, only the results from the motility analysis of transitions from A vs. cumulated B and C is included, however the two analyses produced very similar results (data not shown).

For all survival and locomotion analyses, the statistical significance was tested using the log-rank test (Mantel-Cox). Comparisons were performed against WT, WT(EV) or daf-16, as appropriately. If not otherwise specified, p<0.0001 was considered significant. The pvalues were corrected for multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg method, at alpha=0.05.

One-way ANOVA was used for the analysis of pharyngeal pumping, heat, paraquat and sodium azide stress resistance assays. All mutants were compared to wild type and statistical significance was assessed using Dunnett's test. represent either the death of a worm (A) or the transition from a healthy state to a sick state (becoming impaired or frail) (B). For the healthspan analysis, censored and dead worms are removed. (C-F) Comparison between healthspan curves. Statistical significance was determined using the log rank test.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

Conceptualization

Figure 1 . 1Kaplan-Meier survival curves depicting the effects of combined genetic interventions on odr-3, ife-2 and cku-70 at 20° C. (A-D) Lifespan comparisons in the WT background (continuous lines). (E-H) Lifespan comparisons in the daf-16(mu86) background (dashed lines). Survival curves represent: (A, E) odr-3(n1605) and ife-2(RNAi) single and double genetic interventions; (B, F) odr-3(n1605) and cku-70(RNAi) single and double genetic interventions; (C, G) ife-2(RNAi) and cku-70(RNAi) single and double genetic interventions; (D, H) odr-3(n1605), ife-2(RNAi) and cku-70(RNAi) double and triple genetic interventions. (C, D) Control in the case of single RNAi knock-downs refers to treatment with a 1:1 mixture of RNAi bacteria and EV bacteria, in order to be comparable to the double RNAi intervention. (A-H) The survival plots in the WT background represent pooled populations from 3 independent experiments, whereas survival plots in the daf-16(m28) background represent pooled populations from 2 independent experiments. odr-3 denotes odr-3(n1605) fed with EV; daf-16 denotes daf-16(mu86) fed with EV; all strains in these experiments were grown on agar plates with E. coli HT115(DE3) and FUdR.

Figure 2 . 2Network schematic representation of the strains analyzed in this study and of the effects of each genetic intervention. Nodes represent the strains as follows: diamond for WT, circle for single gene interventions, square for double gene interventions, hexagon for triple gene interventions, and octagon for quadruple gene interventions. Nodes are positioned on the vertical axis according to their respective mean lifespan. Edges between worm strains are colored depending on the gain (or loss) in lifespan extension: increase (green), decrease (red) and small or non-significant change (gray). The extent of the change is included on the edge as a percentage increase/decrease between the origin and destination nodes of the edge. odr-3 and daf-16 denote mutants containing the odr-3(n1605) and daf-16(mu86) mutations; ife-2 and cku-70 denote animals in which these genes were modulated by RNAi bacteria. The white bars inside of the nodes indicate the mean ± SEM.

Figure 3 .Figure 4 . 34Kaplan-Meier survival curves for animals containing the odr-3(n1605) and ife-2(ok306) mutations. (A) odr-3(n1605); ife-2(ok306) single and double mutants, cultivated in the presence of FUdR. (B) odr-3(n1605); ife-2(ok306) single and double mutants, cultured without FUdR. (C) Lifespan comparisons for odr-3 and ife-2 in the daf-16(mu86) background. (A-C) Dashed lines are used for odr-3(n1605) and ife-2(ok306) mutants tested in the daf16(mu86) genetic background, while continuous lines are used for WT or single/double odr-3 and ife-2 mutants tested in the WT background. All cohorts were fed OP50 and kept at 20° C. All lifespan values can be viewed in the Supplementary Table 1. AGING Healthspan of combined genetic interventions on odr-3 and ife-2 at 20° C. (A-D) Bar chart representation of motilityassessed healthspan illustrating the fraction of each category upon daily monitorization. Worms are grouped into three categories: mobile (white), impaired (light gray) and frail (dark gray). Dead and censored animals were subtracted from these analyses. (E) Mean number of days in each motility state throughout lifespan. The mean time spent in the impaired state is computed as the difference between the mean time spent as mobile or impaired, and the mean time spent in the mobile state. The mean time spent in the frail state is computed as the difference between the mean lifespan and mean time spent as mobile or impaired.