To verify the functional significance of LAG PPIs, we inactivated first-order partners of LAGs and assayed their effect on lifespan in C. elegans. We focused our search on a subset of 228 of the 666 first-order partners, selected because they are essential in development, a process closely associated with longevity regulation [7,17,18,19,28]. RNAi clones were available for 190 of these 228 genes (Tables S1 and S3). Evidence that previous screens have not been saturating supports the possibility that a rigorous analysis of our systematically selected candidate gene set will reveal previously unidentified LAGs.

Because LAGs are highly evolutionary conserved, we also utilized a Human Longevity Network (HLN) to identify candidate regulators of lifespan [17,22,28]. The HLN was previously constructed by compiling a set of genes directly associated with human aging, such as those responsible for progeria, and the orthologs of LAGs experimentally defined in other species [18,22]. Together with their first-order partners, these genes form a continuous PPI network [22,28]. Like the first-order partners of the WLN, the first-order partners of HLN LAGs could also be considered putative new longevity regulators. As human studies to test network predictions experimentally are not possible, we elected to test the C. elegans orthologs of the first-order partners of LAGs in the HLN. We further narrowed our candidate list from the HLN to 272 orthologs previously found to be required for development in C. elegans. RNAi clones targeting 227 genes were available (Tables S2 and S3). Forty-three of the C. elegans orthologs of HLN genes with available RNAi clones were already present amongst the 190 WLN candidates, suggesting that the first-order interactions of LAGs, like the genes themselves, may be highly conserved.

We chose to inactivate the 374 putative C. elegans LAGs identified by the above network analysis post-developmentally (Tables S1-S3). This approach was necessitated by our focus upon genes required for development, an ontology enriched with known LAGs. Post-developmental gene inactivation circumvents developmental pleiotropies, thus simplifying the interpretation of longevity phenotypes. Genes essential for development are Figure 3. Interaction of new LAGs with known worm longevity genes. The LAGs identified in our screen interact extensively with known longevity genes. Nearly two-thirds of these genes interact with daf-2 and bar-1, both involved in the daf-16-mediated lifespan extension, and clk-2, a gene whose mutations may extend lifespan by slowing down development. Size of nodes is proportional with the number of PPIs in the BioGRID interactome. Bordered circles depict genes essential for growth and development. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0048282.g003 enriched approximately 5-fold for LAGs and 15-fold for gene inactivations that extend lifespan by greater than 20% [5,6,7]. In addition, evidence suggests that many lifespan regulatory treatments that are effective when applied during development are also effective if initiated during adulthood [7,31,32,33,34,35]. Therefore, post-developmental gene inactivation maximizes our capacity to detect genes that regulate longevity.

In our primary screen consisting of the post-developmental inactivation of 374 candidate LAGs, lifespan was approximated by survival at four time points distributed across the period of mortality. In this primary analysis, 101 gene inactivations conferred a consistent increase in survival and 55 a decrease, compared to controls (Tables S1-S3). To confirm these results in a more rigorous analysis, we selected 57 novel putative LAGs (45 long-lived and 12 short-lived phenotypes) for longitudinal analysis on the basis of phenotypic strength. Longitudinal analysis confirmed 19 of the gene inactivations that increase lifespan and 11 that decrease lifespan, thus identifying 30 new C. elegans LAGs (Tables 1 and 2). The rate of identification for lifespan-promoting gene inactivations (19/374; 5.1%) is much greater than that achieved in genome-wide screens (average 0.38%), as well as that of an unbiased screen that canvased genes known to play critical roles in development (2.4%, Tables 3 and 4) [5,6,7]. This comparison is crude because conditions and selection criteria utilized in each screen were distinct. However, if the rate at which our preliminary results were confirmed longitudinally could be extrapolated to the untested preliminary hits, the set of 374 candidate LAGs would include 42 (11.2%) that increase lifespan when inactivated and 50 (13.4%) that decrease it.

This is likely to be an overestimate, however, because the genes selected for secondary analysis represent the strongest preliminary scores.

Most of the longitudinally confirmed gene inactivations that increased mean lifespan did so by a small but statistically significant percentage when performed post-developmentally (average 9.7%). Previous screens for increased lifespan have identified numerous genes that extend lifespan by upwards of 20%. In this screen, we report only one gene at that level, T23D8.3, which extends mean lifespan by 26% (Table 1, Figure 2). T23D8.3 is required for embryonic and larval development. This is also true of its ortholog, LTV1, which is essential for cell growth in yeast and cultured human cells [36]. LTV1 participates in the nuclear export and processing of the 40S ribosomal subunit, suggesting that T23D8.3 inactivation inhibits translation in C. elegans. The second greatest extension of mean lifespan resulted from inhibition of a protein subunit of the 40S ribosome (rps-14), another component of translation, with 16.6% extension of mean lifespan (Table 1, Figure 2).

The identification of gene inactivations with modest lifespan extension phenotypes (12 of 19 gene inactivations ,10%, Tables 1 and 2) is consistent with our hypothesis in several ways. First, we predicted that we would identify gene inactivations missed in previous screens (false negatives). The subtlety of some of the observed phenotypes may explain, in part, how they were overlooked. Second, previous LAG network studies have highlighted the existence of nodes representing key lifespan regulatory factors [16,37]. Our results suggest that genes interacting directly or indirectly with these nodes, such as those tested here, contribute to their activity, perhaps additively, but are not strictly required.

We performed a functional enrichment analysis using DAVID to determine whether translation or other processes were enriched within our results. In total, 17 of the gene inactivations that conferred increased longevity in our preliminary analysis are involved in translation, including initiation factors, tRNA synthetases, and ribosomal subunits. This ontology was not present for genes found to decrease lifespan when inactivated. Therefore genes required for translation are specifically enriched amongst those that extend lifespan when inactivated in comparison to both the set of genes tested (p = 4.1E-4) and the C. elegans genome as a whole (p = 3.3E-8). Previous studies have demonstrated that translation inhibition is a potent mechanism of longevity extension [7,38,39,40,41]. Current models of longevity extension thereby substantiate the results of our combined in silico and in vivo analyses.

We longitudinally confirmed 11 positive regulators of lifespan; these genes decrease C. elegans longevity when inactivated postdevelopmentally. The frequency at which these genes were identified (11/374, 2.9%) is comparable to that achieved in a previous genome wide screen for positive regulators of lifespan in daf-2 mutants (3.2%) [21]. Our results, however, represent the first systematic analysis of short-lifespan phenotypes in a wild-type background. The actual number of positive regulators in our candidate LAG set may have been significantly greater than 11 because 92% of candidates retested were confirmed and 44 preliminary candidates were not retested. Mutation or inactivation of many genes with key longevity-regulatory functions reduces wild-type longevity while abrogating lifespan extension in one or more long-lived mutants, resulting in the equalization of wild-type and mutant lifespans [10,11,12,13,14,15]. The genes identified in this screen are particularly intriguing because they interact with known components of the LAG network. It would be interesting to determine whether the positive regulators we have identified contribute specifically to particular mechanisms of lifespan extension, such as insulin/IGF-1 signaling or the disruption of translation. Determining the molecular roles these genes might play in lifespan extension will be a topic of continued research.

Analyzing the interactions of the LAGs identified in this screen within the existing WLN reveals that almost two thirds of the new LAGs are connected to at least one of the prominent lifespan regulatory genes daf-2, bar-1, or clk-2. Moreover, 5 genes (rnr-2, asb-1, rpb-8, hmg-4, and B0285.1) interact with all 3. Multiple connections to established LAGs were also observed for gei-4. The WLN LAGs identified in this screen and their first-order LAG partners form a continuous network -a WLN module, which is presented in Figure 3.