Each dot represents the percentage of orthologs between the model species and a single other species (total of 205 species from all Kingdoms; for a full list of species see Table S1). The entire proteome of the model species (extracted from the InParanoid database) was used as control. The species (X-axis) are ordered in descending order of the percentage of orthologs for the entire proteome. Presented are the ortholog percentage of the entire proteome (gray triangle), LAGs (black circle), LAGs discovered by lifespan extension (LSE-LAGs, gray circle), Caenorhabditis elegans essential LAGs discovered by postdevelopmental RNAi (PD RNAi LAGs, gray x), and C. elegans essential LAGs discovered by postdevelopmental RNAi that resulted in lifespan extension (PD RNAi LSE-LAGs, black +). extend lifespan rather than reduce it (Curran & Ruvkun, 2007;Tacutu et al., 2012), which means that they have detrimental effects later in life. As these genes are essential for the early stages of life, but their postdevelopmental inactivation resulted in lifespan extension, this by definition is consistent with Williams's idea of antagonistic pleiotropy (Williams 1957). In support of this notion are also our previous studies (Budovsky et al., 2007Tacutu et al., 2010bTacutu et al., , 2011Tacutu et al., , 2012 and the study of Promislow (2004). All in all, the results suggest that antagonistic pleiotropy might be a conserved principle of aging.

One of the strong features of InParanoid is that it provides the best balance between sensitivity and specificity (Chen et al., 2007). Yet, the proteomes found in the InParanoid database contain many poorly annotated proteins and predicted transcripts that were not experimentally verified (Sonnhammer & Ostlund, 2015). These proteins have relatively few orthologs in other species and therefore could influence the results. In contrast, the interactomes from the BioGrid database (http://www.thebiogrid.org), the largest repository of validated PPIs, almost exclusively include experimentally verified proteins (Chatr-Aryamontri et al., 2015). Therefore, the BioGrid data could serve as an additional, high quality control for a more rigorous testing of the evolutionary conservation of LAGs. For this purpose, we used the interactomes of S. cerevisae, C. elegans, and D. melanogaster. As seen in Fig. S1, the same trend of over-conservation of LAGs was also observed in comparison with the BioGrid control. Mouse was not included in the analysis because its BioGrid gene list still contains a relatively small portion of the entire genome and thus could not provide a reliable control.

Altogether, the results clearly show a high evolutionary conservation of LAGs across distant species. With regard to this, a question arises as to whether this observation is attributed to an enrichment of specific categories that are known to be strongly preserved in the course of evolution. From the available data on gene and protein annotations for the four model species, we noted that LAGs are enriched in genes that belong to categories known to be extraordinarily conserved in evolution, such as the ribosomal or mitochondrial genes (Table S2). However, exclusion of LAGs belonging to these categories from the analysis had almost no impact (Fig. S2). Therefore, we conclude that the high evolutionary conservation of LAGs is not solely attributed to an enrichment of proteins from exceptionally conserved categories, but rather reflects a general trend.

'Public' and 'private' LAG categories

The distinction between public and private mechanisms of aging and longevity is a fundamental question in comparative studies of biogerontology (Gems & Partridge, 2013). We attempted to shed some light on this subject based on the ortholog distribution of LAGs in different taxa. Yet, it is important to note that if a given LAG is highly evolutionary conserved, it does not automatically translate to its role in a public mechanism of aging. In fact, in order to draw conclusions on public or private mechanisms from the presence or lack of orthologs, one must (i) have a context on the mode of operation of a given protein as its function could differ between species; or (ii) compare groups of proteins belonging to a certain pathway or category, so that generalized Fig. 2 Ratio of LAGs orthologs to the entire proteome. Each graph represents the LAGs discovered in the indicated model species. Each dot represents the ratio between the number of LAG orthologs to the orthologs from the entire proteome, for a single other species (total of 205 species from all Kingdoms; for a full list of species see Table S1). The species (X-axis) are ordered in descending order of ortholog percentage for the entire proteome. assumptions may be made. The data used in this study only allow for the second approach.

Thus, we comprised lists of proteins under different conservation criteria, for example, proteins that have orthologs across at least 12 phyla or have orthologs in a limited number of taxa (for more details, see Table S3). As shown in Fig. 3, LAG orthologs are distributed over more phyla than the entire genome, again indicating their wider evolutionary conservation. Nevertheless, while most LAGs are broadly presented across phyla, a considerable portion of them (around 10-20%) are specific to a relatively small number of phyla (Fig. 3).

To get further insight into the universality of longevity-associated pathways, we carried out an enrichment analysis for LAGs with orthologs across a large number of phyla ('public') and those that are limited to specific phyla ('private'). For the 'private' analysis, we used the phylum of the corresponding model organism (as depicted in the Table 1), as smaller taxonomic groups did not yield statistically conclusive results. The detailed results of the enrichment analysis are available in Table S4 and Fig. S3.

Overall, the analysis of the most conserved (public) LAGs revealed that they, not surprisingly, fall under three major categories (Table 1): (i) ribosome and translational processes, (ii) mitochondria and energy metabolism pathways (including the FoxO pathway), and (iii) DNA repair. At a first view, it may seem that the most conserved LAGs are enriched for these categories just because of their function, regardless of their role in aging, that is, simply because they belong to very basic and therefore highly conserved biological processes. However, comparing the most conserved LAGs against different backgrounds showed that it is not the case. Indeed, these pathways were not only overrepresented when compared to the entire genome or to all LAGs, but-what is most important-when compared to all highly conserved genes (i.e., all genes with orthologs across at least 10 or 12 phyla; Table S4). The results provide a strong support for previous studies (in particular those by McElwee et al., 2007;Smith et al., 2008;Freitas et al., 2011;MacRae et al., 2015;Ma et al., 2016;) and highlight the public role of the above categories in the control of lifespan. It should however be noted that the number of LAGs was not always sufficient for a robust enrichment analysis, especially for the mouse and fly models (see Table S3); the results from the yeast and worm models were more significant and thus more reliable.

LAGs were discovered in either lifespan-extending or lifespanreducing experiments (or sometimes both). Do these two groups display any specificity in their enriched pathways/categories? Not surprisingly, the common public categories for both groups included the ribosomal and mitochondrial genes ( Table 1, Table S5 and S6). However, we surprisingly found that the division of all LAGs in such a way also revealed a distinct pattern of enrichment. In particular, an overrepresentation of autophagy-related and DNA repair genes was observed only among the LAGs discovered in lifespan-decreasing experiments (LSD-LAGs; Table 1 and Table S5). In contrast, LAGs discovered by lifespanextending experiments (LSE-LAGs; Table 1 and Table S6) were specifically enriched for oxidative phosphorylation and oxidoreductase.

Due to the high evolutionary conservation of LAGs, those that have orthologs only in the same phylum as the model species in which they were discovered are relatively small in number. Because of that, the enrichment analysis of these genes yielded less significant results (Table S4). Nevertheless, the 'private' list for S. cerevisae (i.e., yeast LAGs with orthologs only in Ascomycota/Fungi) was found to be enriched with autophagy-related genes, which can be attributed mostly to LSD-LAGs (Table 1). For LAGs that have orthologs only in Nematoda, we found enrichment in G protein-related genes, apparently attributed to LSE-LAGs. This is surprising because both autophagy and G protein signaling represent basic and highly conserved processes which were shown to be involved in aging and longevity in various model organisms  (Lans & Jansen, 2007;Hahm et al., 2009;Rubinsztein et al., 2011;Schneider & Cuervo, 2014). Yet, the unusual enrichment of these pathways in yeast and worms definitely highlights their importance in determination of longevity for these taxa specifically, although it does not exclude their role in mechanisms of aging for higher taxa. For vertebrates, we found a significant enrichment of LSE-LAGs in Neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction, which could reflect the importance of neuroendocrine regulation of aging and longevity in higher organisms (Dilman et al., 1986;Frolkis, 1988;Blagosklonny, 2013).

All of the above results obtained by David were also validated by the WebGestalt, EnrichR and Panther tools (see Methods; C. elegans data are presented as an example in Fig. S3).

Stress response genes and the importance of overexpression interventions