Comparative biology is an essential and growing approach in the biology of ageing (16). AnAge (http://genomics. senescence.info/species/) is an integrative database of longevity records for over 4000 organisms. It includes, if available, maximum longevity, taxonomy, metabolic characteristics, development schedules and a multitude of additional life history data. AnAge is now over a decade old (2), becoming the most widely used resource in HAGR (see below). Although other datasets with longevity data exist (17), AnAge is arguably the 'gold standard' for longevity data in animals given its regular updating and quality data from manual curation. Build 14 (14 October 2017) contains 4244 entries, mostly individual species but also entries for higher taxa like primates and mammals. AnAge has previously been described in depth (3,18), and so its utility will only be briefly described. Entries contain maximum longevity and, where available, mortality parameters. Entries indicate whether the maximum longevity value comes from specimens kept in captivity or from the wild. Each entry includes a qualifier of confidence in the data and an estimate of sample size (3,18). Anecdotal evidence is not used to estimate maximum longevity but may be included in the observations. Factors that might introduce bias into comparative ageing studies, such as body size, metabolic rate, and development schedules, are also included where available (3,4,18).

A list of species with negligible senescence is also provided.

D1086 Nucleic Acids Research, 2018, Vol. 46, Database issue

The primary goal of AnAge is as a data source for comparative and evolutionary biogerontological studies, thus enabling researchers to study what factors influence differences in phenotype and longevity across phylogeny. For example, one large-scale study using data from AnAge investigated how multiple ecological and mode-of-life traits affect lifespan (19). The data from AnAge have also been incorporated into the Comparative Cellular and Molecular Biology of Longevity Database (http://genomics.brocku.ca/ ccmbl/) (20), the MitoAge database (http://www.mitoage. info) (21), the Encyclopedia of Life (http://eol.org/), and the Animal Diversity Web (http://animaldiversity.ummz. umich.edu), demonstrating the versatility of this resource.

Recent updates for AnAge have mostly been qualitative. The rate of new species added has reduced over time--we have added 40 new species since the last HAGR publication (3)--but older entries are kept up to date with new findings in the field. Our latest update, build 14, included ∼150 new references. As evidence of the substantial curation efforts in AnAge, the observations in AnAge now total >50 000 words. While the main focus of AnAge remains on data in animals, particularly chordates, the database contains entries for traditional biomedical models, including invertebrates and fungi.

GenDR--a database of dietary restriction-related genes

Dietary restriction (DR) delays the ageing process and extends lifespan in a multitude of species from yeast to mammals (22). However, the exact mechanisms of how DR extends lifespan are still unknown. As previously described (23), GenDR (http://genomics.senescence.info/diet/) is a database of DR-related genes. Herein, the use and function of GenDR will be briefly outlined along with updates since the 2013 HAGR paper (3).

DR-essential genes are defined in GenDR as those which, if genetically modified, interfere with DR-mediated lifespan extension (3,23). GenDR has entries for nematodes, fruit flies, mice, budding yeast and fission yeast. We recently (24 June 2017) released a new build of GenDR, which contains 214 DR-essential genes, a 35% increase (56 new genes) since our previous update (3). GenDR also contains a complimentary dataset of 173 genes consistently differentially expressed in mammals under DR (24).

GenDR is the first and, to our knowledge, only database of DR genes. We hope that GenDR may aid in the development of pharmacological DR mimetics. Indeed, GenDR was used to validate the gene targets of candidate DR mimetics in worms (25). In an analysis of the downstream targets of daf-16, a gene involved in DR in worms, four of the targets overlapped with the GenDR database, demonstrating the involvement of different components of the pathway in DR (26).

LongevityMap--human genetic variants associated with longevity

Variation in human lifespan has been found to be 20-30% heritable, with increasing heritability at advanced ages (27). As next-generation sequencing and genome-wide approaches advance, so does the capacity for performing longevity association studies. To catalog the increasing volume of data in genetic studies of human longevity, we created LongevityMap (http://genomics.senescence.info/ longevity/), a database of genes, gene variants and chromosomal locations associated with longevity (28). This differs from the GenAge database, which focuses mostly on data from model organisms and the few genes associated with human ageing (e.g. genes causing progeroid syndromes).

Entries in LongevityMap were compiled from the literature (28). Negative results are included to provide information regarding each gene and variant previously studied in the context of human longevity. Both large and smallscale studies are included, along with several cross-sectional studies and studies of extreme human longevity (e.g., in centenarians). Due to the diversity of data, details about the study design are outlined for each entry, such as population and sample size (28). Build 3 (24 June 2017) of Longevi-tyMap contains 550 entries (a 9% increase in this latest update), 884 genes (18% increase) and 3144 variants (58% increase). Of the 550 entries, 275 are reported as significant findings. We hope that LongevityMap will act as a reference to help researchers parse the increasing quantities of data related to the genetics of human longevity.

DrugAge-

a database of ageing

related drugs

Identifying drugs that could extend lifespan in model organisms has received considerable interest (29). Our new DrugAge database (http://genomics.senescence.info/drugs/) is a curated database of drugs, compounds and supplements with anti-ageing effects that extend longevity in model organisms. Although another database of candidate geroprotectors exists, called Geroprotectors.org (30), DrugAge provides a more comprehensive and systematic dataset of lifeextending drugs and compounds (31).

DrugAge was developed to allow researchers to prioritize drugs and compounds relevant to ageing, providing highquality summary data in model organisms. As described (31), the data were primarily compiled from the literature, in addition to other databases and submissions from the scientific community. Build 2 (01 September 2016) of DrugAge contains 418 distinct compounds across 1316 lifespan assays on 27 unique model organisms.

Hundreds of genes in several pathways act as regulators of ageing (1,32). However, analysis of DrugAge and other HAGR databases has revealed that the overlap between the targets of lifespan-extending drugs and known ageing related genes is modest (31). This indicates that most ageing-related pathways have yet to be targeted pharmacologically; DrugAge may aid in guiding further assays. This was recently demonstrated in one study where machine learning was used to predict whether a compound would increase lifespan in worms using data from Dru-gAge. The best model had 80% prediction accuracy and the top hit compounds could broadly be divided into compounds affecting mitochondria, inflammation, cancer, and gonadotropin-releasing hormone (33).

CellAge--a database of cell senescence genes

Cell senescence, also known as cellular senescence (CS), is the irreversible cessation of cell division of normally prolif-Nucleic Acids Research, 2018, Vol. 46, Database issue D1087 erating cells. Senescent cells accumulate as an organism ages and may be an important contributor to ageing and agerelated disease (34). However, the connection between organismal ageing and CS remains controversial (35). CellAge (http://genomics.senescence.info/cells/) is a new database of CS-associated genes, built to elucidate mechanisms of CS and its role in ageing. It is described here for the first time.

To develop CellAge, a list of CS-associated genes was manually curated from the literature. Selection was based on gene manipulation experiments in human cells, which caused cells to induce or inhibit CS. The type of CS (replicative, stress-induced, or oncogene-induced), cell line, cell type and manipulation methods were standardized and recorded, facilitating the search and grouping of records of interest. The database includes data from primary cells in addition to immortalized cell lines and cancer cell lines. Each record contains observations about the evidence. Where reported, common markers of CS (36) such as growth arrest, increased SA-␤-galactosidase activity, SAheterochromatin foci, a decrease in BrdU incorporation, changes in morphology and specific gene expression signatures are described.

A Human Cellular Senescence Gene Database (HCSGD) has been recently described by others (37), yet it combines information from many distinct sources and types of evidence, while CellAge has a more clear and rigorous selection procedure as well as manual curation. The first build of CellAge contains 279 entries, in which experiments in lung fibroblasts, embryonic kidney cells and foreskin fibroblasts are the most widely represented in the data. The majority of genes are associated with replicative senescence (232 genes), followed by stress-induced senescence (34 genes) and oncogene-induced senescence (28 genes).