(2) As all changes are assigned to a tissue it is easy to see the different changes occurring on an organ level. (3) Each change is fully referenced allowing for additional details into the methodology and access to the original data. (4) Clear identification of the amount and direction of change with age (if applicable) is provided, along with how it was derived. (5) Changes can be stored persistently between sessions as well as compared on-site using the graphing functionality. (6) Descriptions provide more details, including greater clarification regarding the context in which the change was observed and/or measured. (7) Linking changes to genes allows, much like linking tissues, the ability to see all the changes associated with a particular gene.

(http://en.wikipedia.org) and further expanded in our lab. Each tissue has a parent and zero or more children. The root parent represents the whole organism and the tissue hierarchy can be navigated on our interface. Each change is associated with one or more tissues, allowing for exploration of the number and types of changes occurring in each tissue or organ.

The property object allows for non-duplicate properties to be defined and associated with changes (e.g. the location property may take values like synapse, mitochondria, cellular, etc). These properties are defined by the curators and can encompass any value which may be relevant to the change but is not recorded elsewhere. This allows for great flexibility in recording type-specific information (e.g. subcellular location) and can be filtered against in the search interface. The data object allows the association of specific types of data with a change. It is divided into sub-objects that cover a class of data, such as percentage, equation or dataset. These store specific sets of data with some fields such as 'change measured' common between all. Percentage objects store a simple percentage value; equation objects store the components of an equation describing the change in a quantitative fashion; dataset objects store an arbitrary number of data points to plot more fragmentary data such as mortality rates. With this the database can cover most types of data that can be associated with a change during the life course, and more can be easily added, if required, with very little effort. These data are presented on the details page and used for the display of increase/decrease icons on the search page, among others.

The relationship object stands alone as it is not directly related to a change. Instead, similar to the tissue object, it stores a hierarchical representation of information. Each relationship object is linked to a single change and optionally another relationship object. These are then chained together to create a tree. Multiple trees can be associated with a change and can describe different types of associations from causal relationships to similar processes that are occurring together. Linking the relationship objects to changes allows the construction of complex hierarchies often encompassing different biological levels while still permitting a given change to appear in multiple hierarchies. A change can appear in multiple trees as the change may be a part of multiple processes, some of which may not be closely related. A good example of this is DAA982 (which refers to changes in CD16 expression in the elderly) in which there are two trees describing how the gene (a molecular change) reacts during two distinct physiological ageing changes. Relationships also link pathologies to physiological and molecular changes associated with them, like for Alzheimer's disease (DAA615) which is associated with neuritic plaques (DAA723) and beta-amyloid deposits (DAA1996).

Interpretation and visualization of the data is facilitated by tools built into the DAA. Any numerical change within the DAA can be compared against others by adding them to a list which can then be analysed in a graph form within the D876 Nucleic Acids Research, 2015, Vol. 43, Database issue website. For example, a comparison can be made of molecular changes presented in graph form allowing the comparison of the gene expression levels recorded by those changes (Figure 4). More complex analyses can be performed using external tools as the DAA permits downloading both through its export tool and through the availability of the complete DAA dataset for download. The export tool itself takes advantage of the search and filtering supported and allows for specific subsets of data to be extracted and saved as a tab-delimited text file. The DAA and all its data is made available under a permissive licence.

DATA SELECTION AND CURATION

Data in the DAA is manually curated and each age-related change has been selected based upon clearly defined criteria. First, only age-related changes for which there is direct, empirical evidence supported by one or more references are included. Second, only ageing changes occurring in vivo are incorporated into the DAA. Since our goal is to define typical age-related changes, we focused on those observed during healthy ageing, with the obvious exception of pathological age-related changes that describe mortality and incidence rates of specific diseases of the aged. Although the goal is to make the DAA as complete as possible, the focus is on what are likely the most important age-related changes, which in many cases are the changes that are also involved in determining age-related pathologies. Negative results can be included if these are deemed relevant to understand ageing, e.g. DAA711 refers to measurements of heart physiology that are unchanged with age. Our general policy regarding conflicting reports is to cite all conflicting reports and let users make their own decisions on how to interpret them.

Molecular changes (e.g. gene expression, protein levels and methylation) from high-throughput approaches are usually selected based on criteria for statistical significance that the authors have used in the sourced data, though data and methods (e.g. correction for multiple hypothesis testing) are examined as part of our QC procedures which are described in de Magalhães et al. (6). A P-value cut-off of 0.001 or lower is normally used for genome-wide approaches. This value was reached based on standard practice and observation of effects of the data and ensures that the changes added are above the noise threshold. Ours is an inclusive policy, however, and effect sizes and P-values are included in the DAA to allow users to make their own decisions about which data is relevant. The primary sources of data for the molecular section have been the meta-analysis by de Magalhães et al. (6), public databases like GEO (9) and primary publications. Therefore, quantitative data can be taken directly from publications or recomputed as in (6) with the specific type of equation used indicated in the details page for a given entry. At the time of writing the DAA includes 24 datasets from high throughput screens (mainly microarrays) that cover 22 different tissues.

Physiological changes were sourced from books (2,3,15), reviews and primary publications. Major changes in cell populations are likely to contribute to age-related physiological and pathological changes, therefore studies of cellular alterations with age are included, but results from in vitro cellular models of ageing are not included in the DAA. Pathological and some physiological changes were sourced from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) (http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/hdi.htm), selected based on their relevance to chronic ageing conditions and the ages which they cover. Psychological changes were sourced from the same locations as the physiological changes with the condition that they must indicate a change in behaviour or cognition as the organism ages.

Ageing changes vary between individuals and populations. It is not the goal of the DAA to capture the individual diversity of age-related changes and thus the relative dependence on large datasets. The objective of the DAA is to provide an overview of major age-related changes and so typical values are featured, though outliers are in-dicated in notes-specific to each data type. For example, gender-specific changes are featured and properly annotated. An attempt is made to obtain data from consistent sources. In mice, age-related changes and even lifespan can vary between strains, therefore the C57BL/6 strain is used as the 'gold standard' in the case of conflicting findings, however discrepancies are highlighted when they occur. The C57BL/6 strain was selected because, currently, it is the most commonly used mouse strain for ageing studies. This strategy is consistent with other similar projects like AGEMAP (16) and the Allen Brain Atlas (17) that also focus on the C57BL/6 strain. If age-related changes are suspected of being population-specific, then this is indicated in the DAA through a specific property.

The site itself uses the Python-based Django framework and is served by an Nginx web server. It uses PostgreSQL 9.1 as a database backend, implementing a number of constraints to ensure entries are not duplicated or left as orphans when a change instance is deleted. A web-based curation application was also created that allows for easy addition and updating of data without requiring knowledge of the technical operations of the portal. We encourage contributions by the wider research community. By having an intuitive and easily usable curation interface this provides the ability to both quickly correct and add relevant information as well as allowing specialists to directly contribute D878 Nucleic Acids Research, 2015, Vol. 43, Database issue to its improvement, thus ensuring that it stays at the forefront of ageing research.

AVAILABILITY