To further understand the characteristics of the PFRG network, we conducted a functional module analysis using the HumanBase online tool 19 (https:// hb. flati ronin stitu te. org). This tool allows for identifying functional modules in a gene-set in a manner specific to a given tissue (in this case, lungs). The analysis revealed six functional modules formed by PFRGs and their immediate partners ( Fig. 3a and Supplementary Table ST5). These include: (i) a cluster encompassing cell signaling, cell migration, proliferation and programmed cell death (MA1, 643 GO terms; p < 0.05); (ii) a cluster of immuno-inflammatory responses (MA2, 177 GO terms; p < 0.05); (iii) a cluster pertaining to nucleotide-related biosynthesis and metabolism Figure 1. Evolutionary conservation of pulmonary fibrosis-related genes (PFRGs). The graph summarizes the percentages of orthologs between humans and given species. Each dot corresponds to a single species from InParanoid (in descending order by the percentage of orthology). A total of 268 species from all kingdoms of life are presented. Orange triangles stand for the percentage of orthologs for PFRGs (n = 195); green circles stand for the percentage for the entire human genome (n = 20,297). The difference in ortholog percentage between the entire genome and PFRGs is significant for the vast majority of species: Chi-square (χ 2 ) goodness of fit, p < 0.05.

For anti-fibrotic genes, there are two functional modules that include at least ten genes each. The first cluster (MB1, 65 GO terms; p < 0.05) includes mostly nucleotide metabolism, and the second module (MB2, 137 GO terms; p < 0.05) encompasses response to hypoxia and MAPK signaling (Fig. 3b). The list of pro-fibrotic genes includes three functional modules: the first one, (MC1, 356 GO terms; p < 0.05) covers regulation of cytokine production, regulation of cell migration and inflammatory response; the second module (MC2, 92 GO terms; p < 0.05) is in relation to actomyosin activity and the third module (MC3, 163 GO terms; p < 0.05) includes cytokine regulation. Figure 2. Cell type enrichment analysis of the PFRGs. Pro-and anti-fibrotic genes were tested for expression enrichment in specific cell types. Analysis was performed against the PanglaoDB database on the Enrichr platform. Presented are the main enriched cell types for both lists and their combined enrichment score (see methods) for pro-fibrotic (red) and anti-fibrotic (green). *Non-significant enrichment in anti-fibrotic genes (p > 0.05) and **Non-significant enrichment in pro-fibrotic genes (p > 0.05). www.nature.com/scientificreports/  www.nature.com/scientificreports/ Network analysis. To further understand the features of PFRGs and how they relate to each other, we performed a protein-protein interaction (PPI) network analysis on the protein products of PFRGs.

As the human proteome is more comprehensively mapped 20 , the analysis was done on the human orthologs of the mouse PFRGs. The analysis shows that PFRGs are highly connected in the interactome (Fig. 4, panel a1) and strongly interact among themselves, forming a large, directly connected component of 107 nodes (56.3% of all PFRGs). This interconnectivity, i.e. the fraction of genes/nodes forming the largest connected subnetwork from a certain gene set, is higher for PFRGs than expected by chance ( Fig. 4, panel a2). The statistical significance of this observation was validated by comparing it with the results from random gene set samples of equal size (Fig. 4, panel a3). Considering this, it is not surprising that several genes in the network are also important hubs, i.e., display very high connectivity with other genes in the network. For example, the topmost 5% network hubs (with 13-21 PFRG interactions and > 150 interactome PPIs), depicted in bold in Fig. 4, include AKT1 (a regulator of mTOR signaling), CAV1, SIRT1 (epigenetic regulator), HSPA5 (heat shock protein), SMAD3 (plays a role in TGFβ signaling), and HIF1A (response to oxygen). Of note, the CAV1 gene was found to be a large hub in both the functional anti-fibrotic modules (Fig. 3b, MB) and in the PFRG PPI network (Fig. 4a, b).

Additionally, the two network hubs HIF1A, which is linked to aging and response to hypoxia 21 , and SMAD3, known as an important player in wound healing and an anti-longevity gene 15,21 , were also found in the pro-fibrotic module (Fig. 3c,  MC1). Another hub of the PFRG network, the AKT1 protein ( Fig. 4a) is well-known for its anti-apoptotic activity and has been linked to cellular senescence 22 .

Scientific

Links between pulmonary fibrosis genes and longevity. Interestingly, many of the enriched categories in the functional modules analysis (Fig. 3., e.g. MA2) are also relevant to aging, while at the same time, many genes from MA3 ( Fig. 3) are in fact longevity-associated genes (LAGs). This prompted the following question: Do genes that influence lung fibrosis have any impact on longevity in mice? To get insight into this issue, we compared the list of PFRGs with the list of LAGs from GenAge, which were reported to affect the lifespan of mice 21,23 . The comparison yielded 18 genetic mouse models of extended lifespan (longevity phenotype) or reduced lifespan (premature aging phenotype), which were also tested for their role in bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis. The results summarized in Fig. 5a and Table 5, clearly show that pro-longevity genetic manipulations also reduce pulmonary fibrosis, while anti-longevity genetic manipulations have the opposite effect. That is, pro-longevity genes tend to be associated with anti-fibrosis (11 out of 12 pro-LAGs are anti-fibrotic), while anti-longevity genes with pro-fibrosis (5 out of 6 anti-LAGs are clearly pro-fibrotic with an additional anti-LAG showing both anti-and pro-fibrotic effects; Fisher's exact test, p = 0.001).

The analysis above suggests that the anti-and pro-fibrotic genes have evolved in tight relation to the anti-and pro-longevity genes, with many of these genes even having direct roles in both lifespan determination and fibrosis development. To further test this notion, we decided to investigate to what extent the gene expression levels of PFRGs correlate with maximum lifespan (MLS). For this we used the tools developed in our lab and collected data, comprising 28 samples from 14 mammalian species, analyzed in our recent cross-species lifespan study 24 . The analysis showed that the expression of many PFRGs (n = 34) correlates with MLS in mammals ( Fig. 5b; Supplementary Table ST6 and ST7). The number of these MLS-associated genes is 2.34 times more than expected by chance (Fisher's exact test, p = 6.4E−05), with R 2 being even greater than 0.6 for some of the correlations, overall suggesting that many fibrosis-related genes might have had a role in the determination of MLS as well.

Discussion

Although many animal models have thus far been established for investigating IPF 7 , the bleomycin model, despite its limitations and disadvantages, is the most widely used and generally viewed as the standard in modeling pulmonary fibrosis 25 . In this study, we collected a list of over 200 genes (PFRGs) influencing the course and/or outcome of bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis, and performed a comprehensive analysis on their role in the bleomycin mouse model. The PFRGs are currently available in the TiRe database, which contains curated (a) Protein-protein interaction network of PFRGs. The network was constructed using the BioGRID database. Depicted is the largest continuous component of the pulmonary fibrosis network (107 nodes). Green nodes represent anti-fibrotic genes (N = 41), red are pro-fibrotic genes (N = 55), and blue nodes are genes with an unclear (both pro-and anti-) effect (N = 11). Pulmonary fibrosis hubs, the topmost 5% connected genes in the network, are highlighted with bold text and a black border. (a1) PFRGs (blue bar) are significantly more connected than random interactome genes (green bar), with a higher average number of protein-protein interactions (64.4 for PFRGs vs. 45.5 for all genes) and a GSEA-based enrichment score of 0.6 for degree connectivity (p < 0.05).

(a2) The observed interconnectivity of PFRGs in the interactome, depicted by the red dot in the scatter plot, can be compared to the percentage of interconnected nodes (on the Y-axis), found in the largest continuous component, for randomly sampled node sets. The plot shows the sampling of subsets of random interactome nodes, of various sizes (represented in a log10 scale on the X-axis, from 50 to 17,600 nodes), for which the interconnectivity was computed 100 times. (a3) The interconnectivity of the PFRG network (blue line), compared to the histogram of frequencies of interconnectivity, per one thousand random samples of the same geneset size (Y-axis). PFRG interconnectivity (56.31%) is significantly larger than expected, with a Z-score of 5.37 (distribution average 13.9%, SD: 7.9%). (b) Anti-fibrotic genes in the PFRG network form a continuous subnetwork (26 out of 107, 24.3%). (c) Pro-fibrotic genes in the PFRG network form a continuous subnetwork (42 out of 107, 39.3%). The networks were generated by Cytoscape 3.8.0. (https:// www. cytos cape. org). The panels a1-a3 were generated using a custom R script developed in-house. www.nature.com/scientificreports/ genetic information on wound healing and fibroproliferative processes 15 (hosted at http:// www. tiredb. org). The results of the analysis pointed out several important findings: