In order to find relations between aging and ARDs, we compared aging-related gene sets with ARD genes. Limitations of our study include the fact that possibly many genes associated with longevity and diseases remain to be identified, and the causal genes in many genetic associations with disease are still unknown. In spite of these caveats, our results show an association between aging and ARDs at the genetic level, although this is surprisingly species-specific with a stronger overlap in mice than in invertebrates (flies and worms) and practically no overlap in yeast.

The overlap analyses of anti-and pro-longevity genes shows differences in musculoskeletal, nervous system and cardiovascular diseases. The identified overlaps suggest that the musculoskeletal and nervous systems are related to pro-longevity genes while anti-longevity genes seem more associated with cardiovascular diseases. Looking at ARD classes which overlap with human aging-related genes, a significant overlap is verified for all classes as expected, except for immune system diseases in the analysis with PBC. The nutritional and metabolic diseases, the neoplasms, the cardiovascular diseases and the nervous system diseases have the most significant overlap with human aging-related genes. Eye diseases, respiratory tract diseases (which we considered a negative control) and immune system diseases had the least overlap, but it is important to mention that these are (together with musculoskeletal diseases) the age-related disease classes with fewer genes (Fig. 8).

Genes historically associated with diseases are more likely to be studied. A publication bias correction approach, based on the number of publications associated with each gene, was applied in order to explore and reduce such biases. The analyses with and without PBC, when compared, show the effect of the removal of less studied genes ( Fig. 2A vs. B). The overlaps for C. elegans and S. cerevisiae disappear when the PBC is applied, which supports the hypothesis that some overlaps are statistically significant only due to an overrepresentation of betterstudied genes. The comparison of analyses with and without PBC proves that systematic researcher biases can influence the results in large-scale systems biology, genomic and genetic analysis.

From our network analysis including the first order proteinprotein interaction partners, it is possible to conclude that aging-related genes are widely connected to other genes, which is supported by the huge increase in gene sets' sizes (Fig. 4A). There is an increase in the number of CAD-genes (the common or shared genes by aging and ARD) when including the first order partners, which suggests widespread interactions between aging-related genes and genes associated with age-related diseases. The results are also in agreement with recent research using genome-wide association studies (GWAS) data, which showed the same conclusion for five age-related categories: neurodegenerative, cancers, cardiovascular, metabolic and other diseases (25). A co-expression analysis of the links between aging and ARDs supports the idea of species-specific effects, but with more anti-longevity genes in invertebrates being related to ARDs. It is tempting to speculate that perhaps antilongevity genes work together more tightly in transcriptional networks than pro-longevity genes.

Previous studies of the association between aging and diseases have demonstrated that the association is established by a small number of genes (25). Indeed, in the present analysis, CAD-genes represent a minority of the aging-related genes. CAD-genes are mainly related to apoptosis, metabolic regulation and DNA damage. These processes are similar to those previously reported to be associated with aging and may hint at underlying mechanisms important in various age-related diseases. CAD-genes also showed a higher number of connections with other genes than the remaining genome, which suggests that those genes tend to be hubs in networks. TNF, PON1, APOE and VEGFA are present in a great number of ARDs, which is in line with their involvement in some of the essential pathways whose disruption compromises metabolism and can lead to pathologies (26,27).

The dN/dS ratio analysis showed a statistically significant higher dN/dS ratio of ARD genes when compared to the remaining genome, while aging-related genes had a lower dN/dS ratio that was not statistically significant. Therefore, we can affirm that ARD genes have a higher predisposition to changes in their sequence than aging-related genes. These results are in line with previous findings: an analysis using a previous version of GenAge found that aging-related genes have a lower dN/dS ratio (28). One previous study found a higher molecular evolutionary rate in disease genes (29). Our results further suggest that aging-related genes tend to be evolutionarily conserved, perhaps because they are part of essential pathways and conserved pleiotropic effects on aging (28), while genes associated with age-related diseases may be under relaxed selection given that they impact later in life.

Finally, taking advantage of a database of gene-drug interactions, we mapped GenAge's genes to drugs and obtained a list of 20 candidate drugs for aging effects. Of these, three are already experimentally validated and the rest is yet to be explored. As such, these compounds are promising for future studies.

Concluding Remarks

The main conclusion from this work is that aging and agerelated diseases are related and share more genes than expected by chance. Human aging-related genes showed a considerable overlap with ARDs. These overlaps are driven by a small subset of aging-related genes which are associated with various age-related diseases and are hubs in networks. Besides, the extent of overlaps decreases with evolutionary distance, and yeast aging-related genes show practically no overlap with ARDs. Novel differences in overlapping age-related disease classes between anti-and pro-longevity genes were observed: Nervous system and musculoskeletal diseases seem more associated with pro-longevity, while cardiovascular diseases have a stronger association with anti-longevity genes. Moreover, network analyses (protein-protein interactions (PPI) and co-expression) suggest the existence of intermediate genes which promote the associations between aging and age-related disease genes. Overall, our work establishes a new standard in the analysis of aging-related genes in a systematic way.

Materials and Methods

Aging

and longevity

associated genes

Aging-associated genes were obtained from GenAge Build 17 (6). These include 298 human candidate aging-related genes. GenAge also includes aging-or longevity-related genes in model organisms. For use with human datasets, human orthologs of model organism genes were used, composed of 1037 genes from the four main biomedical model organisms: mouse, fruit fly, roundworm and baker's yeast. The genes of each model organism were separated by their longevity classification: anti-or pro-longevity. Pro-longevity genes are genes whose decreased expression (due to knockout, mutations or RNA interference) reduces lifespan and/or whose overexpression extends lifespan; conversely, anti-longevity genes are those whose decreased expression extends lifespan and/or whose overexpression decreases it (6). Genes which were not included in one of these two longevity classes were excluded. A small number (19) of genes with both anti-and pro-longevity classifications were also excluded.

To sum up the data, aging-related genes were divided into 11 gene sets: one set of 298 human aging-related genes, two sets (anti-and pro-longevity) of human orthologs from each model organism and two sets with all human orthologs of genes in all model organisms. The mouse sets (i.e. human orthologs of genes associated with aging in mice), have 23 and 59 genes, the fruit fly sets have 48 and 87 genes, the roundworm sets have 381 and 290 genes, and lastly the baker's yeast sets have 41 and 13 genes, respectively anti-and pro-longevity (Supplementary Materials, Table S18). Finally, sets with all orthologs have 448 and 421 genes, anti-and pro-longevity sets, respectively. The full lists of human aging-related genes and human orthologs are available in the sup plementary material (Supplementary Dataset 4).

Data on human genes associated with longevity in genetic association studies were obtained from the LongevityMap build 1 (20). In the full set of 755 genes, there were 328 genes with at least one significant result reported.

Age

related disease genes

Age-related disease (ARDs) genes were assembled on 15-04-2015 from a diseases list compiled by a National Institute of Aging study. The list only includes genes with an association with the disease phenotype and with a MeSH annotation (30). This list is available online (https://www.irp.nia.nih.gov/ branches/rrb/dna/gene_sets.htm) and it was compiled using information from the Genetic Association Database (30).