Small molecules for cell reprogramming: a systems biology analysis Published: December 17, 2021

Anna Knyazer The Shraga Segal Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Genetics Center for Multidisciplinary Research on Aging Ben-Gurion University of the Negev Beer-ShevaIsrael

Gabriela Bunu Systems Biology of Aging Group Institute of Biochemistry of the Romanian Academy BucharestRomania

Dmitri Toren Systems Biology of Aging Group Institute of Biochemistry of the Romanian Academy BucharestRomania

Teodora Bucaciuc Mracica Systems Biology of Aging Group Institute of Biochemistry of the Romanian Academy BucharestRomania

Yael Segev The Shraga Segal Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Genetics Center for Multidisciplinary Research on Aging Ben-Gurion University of the Negev Beer-ShevaIsrael

Marina Wolfson The Shraga Segal Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Genetics Center for Multidisciplinary Research on Aging Ben-Gurion University of the Negev Beer-ShevaIsrael

Khachik K Muradian D.F. Chebotarev Institute of Gerontology of National Academy of Medical Sciences of Ukraine KievUkraine

Robi Tacutu robi.tacutu@gmail.com@0000-0001-5853-2470 Systems Biology of Aging Group Institute of Biochemistry of the Romanian Academy BucharestRomania

Vadim E Fraifeld vadim.fraifeld@gmail.com@orcid.org The Shraga Segal Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Genetics Center for Multidisciplinary Research on Aging Ben-Gurion University of the Negev Beer-ShevaIsrael

D.F. Chebotarev Institute of Gerontology of National Academy of Medical Sciences of Ukraine KievUkraine

Small molecules for cell reprogramming: a systems biology analysis 1324Published: December 17, 2021Received: August 6, 2021 Accepted: November 24, 202125739 AGING Research Paper *Equal contribution Correspondence to: Robi Tacutu, Vadim E. Fraifeld;cell reprogrammingchemically-induced pluripotencychemical-protein interactionsprotein-protein interaction networkslongevity pathways If somatic stem cells would be able to maintain their regenerative capacity over time, this might, to a great extent, resolve rejuvenation issues. Unfortunately, the pool of somatic stem cells is limited, and they undergo cell aging with a consequent loss of functionality. During the last decade, low molecular weight compounds that are able to induce or enhance cell reprogramming have been reported. They were named "Small Molecules" (SMs) and might present definite advantages compared to the exogenous introduction of stemness-related transcription factors (e.g. Yamanaka's factors). Here, we undertook a systemic analysis of SMs and their potential gene targets. Data mining and curation lead to the identification of 92 SMs. The SM targets fall into three major functional categories: epigenetics, cell signaling, and metabolic "switchers". All these categories appear to be required in each SM cocktail to induce cell reprogramming. Remarkably, many enriched pathways of SM targets are related to aging, longevity, and age-related diseases, thus connecting them with cell reprogramming.

The network analysis indicates that SM targets are highly interconnected and form protein-protein networks of a scale-free topology. The extremely high contribution of hubs to network connectivity suggests that (i) cell reprogramming may require SM targets to act cooperatively, and (ii) their network organization might ensure robustness by resistance to random failures. All in all, further investigation of SMs and their relationship with longevity regulators will be helpful for developing optimal SM cocktails for cell reprogramming with a perspective for rejuvenation and life span extension.

INTRODUCTION

The pool of adult stem cells is limited, and they undergo cell aging with a consequent loss of functionality [1][2][3]. This limits the application of adult stem cells for cell replacement therapy. Induced pluripotency (iP), a state where somatic differentiated cells become functionally similar to embryonic stem cells (ESC), may serve as an alternative solution. The breakthrough findings of iP, first discovered by Takahashi and Yamanaka in 2006, by ectopic overexpression of four stemness-related transcription factors (TFs: Oct3/4, Sox2, Klf4, and c-Myc; OSKM in short), in mouse fibroblasts [4], and then repeated in human fibroblasts [5], proved the plasticity potential of differentiated cells to rejuvenate back to the ESC-AGING like state. Since then, various combinations of transcription factors for iP have been proposed [6][7][8]. Still, the exogenous introduction of transgenes provides a low yield, both in vitro and in vivo, and may have undesirable complications, including tumorigenicity (reviewed by [3]).

Recently, a number of small molecules (SMs) that are able to induce or enhance pluripotency have been discovered [9][10][11]. They have definite advantages and could be used for iP as a much safer alternative [12]. First of all, cell dedifferentiation activity could be finetuned by varying the concentrations of SM. When needed, the application of lineage-alternating SMs could induce cell differentiation and inhibit cell proliferation. Moreover, SMs are distinguished by nonimmunogenicity, cost-efficiency, minimal residual effects on the genome, and feasibility of in vivo application [13,14]. Consequently, this strategy may have great potential in clinical practice. With this in mind, the major goal of this study was to provide a systems biology view of the SMs, thus supporting researchers with a potential basis for the optimal selection of drugs for cell reprogramming.

In this in silico study we performed: (i) a comprehensive data mining of SMs; (ii) the characterization of SMs and SM cocktails, including assessing their protein targets and possible interactions between them; (iii) the analysis of pathways targeted by SMs, (iv) the comparison of targets and pathways of SM cocktails with those of the OSKM TFs, and (v) screening for SMs as human metabolites.

RESULTS

General characterization of SMs and SM cocktails for cell reprogramming

We first compiled a full list of SMs established thus far, based on a keyword meta-analysis of the literature. Comprehensive data mining with subsequent curation (see Methods) resulted in a total of 92 chemical compounds (Supplementary Table 1) that can either induce or enhance pluripotency, alone or in combination with TFs. These compounds for chemical reprogramming were named "Small Molecules" (SMs) because of their relatively low molecular weight [9], which ranges from 42.4 g/mol (LiCl) to 914.2 g/mol (Rapamycin). The vast majority of SMs represent organic compounds belonging to various chemical classes; however, among SMs were also several inorganic compounds (e.g., Lithium salts).

The analysis of the basic biological activities of the collected SMs revealed that they fall into three major categories ( Figure 1 and Supplementary Tables 2-5): (i) signaling modifiers, (ii) epigenetic modifiers, and (iii) metabolic modifiers. It should also be mentioned that some SMs do not fall into definite categories or belong to more than one functional category. Table 4). The most "popular" AGING (i.e., most frequently used in SM cocktails) signaling modifiers include inhibitors of TGFβ and Hedgehog signaling, both involved in cell differentiation [15,16]. In the epigenetic category, most SMs inhibit either methyltransferases (HMTs and DNMTs, 9 and 6, respectively) or HDACs (n = 4). Other molecules possess either dual activity (HDAC inducers and/or inhibitors, n = 3) or combined (inhibition of HMT+DNMT or DNMT+HDAC) activities. This, respectively, shifts the condensed form of chromatin (heterochromatin) towards a relaxed state (euchromatin) or decreases the level of DNA methylation, thereby ensuring more DNA to be available for transcription. Lastly, metabolic modifiers switch the metabolism from oxidative phosphorylation towards glycolysis, mostly through the inhibition of the GSK3 enzyme [17]. Other SMs (n = 8; 8.7%; Supplementary Table 5) include antioxidants, regulators of calcium transport, autophagy, etc.

To date, several combinations of SMs have been tested for cell reprogramming activity. Of them, 10 SM cocktails have been established. Their compositions, which vary from three [10] to ten [18] compounds, are presented in Supplementary Table 6. The common denominator for all these cocktails is that they are able to induce cell reprogramming, either full (pluripotent state) or partial (multipotent/progenitor cells), without transfection of stemness-related TFs.

A comparison between the cocktails revealed 22 nonredundant chemicals, presented in Table 1. It should be emphasized that each cocktail contains at least one SM from each of the epigenetic, signaling or metabolic activity categories, which coincide well with the results presented above. Of note, TGFβ inhibitors are presented in all cocktails. In particular, RepSox, which can replace Sox2 [19], is included in 7 of the 10 cocktails, and in the other three, the TGFβ inhibitors are replaced by SB431542 or Tranilast, both able to replace Sox2 [10,19], or by A-83-01 [20]. Another frequently-used signaling modifier included Forskolin (found in six cocktails) or BrdU (in Cocktail 5). The mentioned compounds can replace Oct4 [9,21] (see Supplementary  Table 1). The nuclear RARα selective agonist AM 580 and the synthetic retinoic acid receptor ligand TTNPB affecting the retinoic acid signaling pathway are used in four cocktails. As seen in Table 1, the GSK3 inhibitors (CHIR99021, LiCl or Li2CO3) which promote glycolysis are mandatory components of each reprogramming cocktail. Finally, all the cocktails include one or more epigenetic modifiers: HDAC inhibitors (VPA, NaB, Trichostatin A), DNMT inhibitors (5-aza-dC), the inhibitor of LSD1 acting on histone H3 (Parnate), and the inhibitors of histone methyltransferases (DZNep, EPZ004777, SGC0946).