In contrast to the human data set, whose improvements were mostly qualitative, the latest GenAge build hosts now >1700 genes associated with longevity in model organisms, a drastic boost compared with the 2009 update (a 2.17-fold increase, in fact, in the total number of entries). This rapid increase in the volume of data in the model organisms data set could be mainly attributed to the significant advancements in high-throughput technologies in recent years. For example, in yeast, >750 of the total number of longevity observations (73%) come from several recent large-scale screens (6-10). All the model organism gene entries in GenAge are based on experimentally validated results from the peer-reviewed scientific literature and are manually extracted by our database curators. Genes are considered for inclusion if genetic manipulations (including knockout, mutations, overexpression or RNA interference) result in noticeable changes in the ageing phenotype and/or lifespan. In the cases where a reduction in lifespan is observed, we include only studies in which the authors are linking the gene interventions to ageing (either mechanistically or by checking various signs and markers of ageing). Exceptions are genes from large-scale experiments in yeast, though as detailed below, these have a different classification.

Although we try to be as objective as possible, our selection process is still to a certain degree subjective. Our longestablished policy is to have an inclusive rather than exclusive policy, but providing the evidence and links to the relevant literature to allow users to reach their own opinions about each featured gene.

In addition to the increase in the number of entries, in the current update, we have altered the database schema allowing us to host for each longevity-associated gene multiple observations from the same or different studies. By doing this, we are aligning our policy for the data set of genes in model organisms with that for the human data set, namely, reporting all supporting and/or conflicting results instead of only the first study. As of writing (build 16), GenAge provides 1708 genes and 2121 lifespan observations (on average 1.24 observations per gene), of which only a small number (4% of the genes) represent conflicting results (Table 2). Moreover, most (83%) of these 'conflicting' results were found for yeast genes.

One of the reasons GenAge has been so popular since its creation is because it has allowed computational gerontologists to access and directly use its data. In this update, we have gone one step further and acknowledged that GenAge can be even more useful if more quantitative data is included. As such, the structure and content of the database have been updated, and the new version of GenAge includes extensive quantitative data. Namely, we have extracted for each experiment, where data was available, the effect (relative change) that a certain genetic intervention has on the mean and/or maximal lifespan. In total, >1250 observations, accounting for 1057 genes for model organisms, have been annotated this way.

Additionally, we have recorded the type of intervention and categorized longevity-associated genes either as proor anti-longevity. The criteria for the division of longevity-associated genes into pro-and anti-longevity are based on the type of intervention (loss-of-function or gain-of-function) and its impact on lifespan, and were described previously (3). Briefly, pro-longevity genes are defined as the genes whose overexpression extends lifespan, or whose decreased activity (e.g. because of knockout or RNA interference) reduces lifespan. As aforementioned, in the latter case, we focus on genes linked to ageing processes, such as genes in which mutations result in signs of premature ageing. As this can be problematic for yeast large-scale lifespan screens, yeast genes derived from screens or for which a link to ageing processes has not been observed have been annotated as 'necessary for fitness' genes instead of 'pro-longevity' genes. Anti-longevity genes are those for which the aforementioned interventions have the opposite effects. In cases where conflicting results were observed, or the data were not sufficient to draw a definite conclusion, our policy has been to keep all observation and annotate the genes as 'Unclear' and 'Unannotated', respectively. Not taking into account genes with conflicting results, GenAge catalogues a total of 721 anti-longevity genes, 413 prolongevity genes and 485 genes necessary for fitness ( Table 2).

It should be, however, noted that this does not necessarily reflect the real genome-wide distribution of pro-and anti-longevity genes, as our data does not account for any biases introduced by the type of experimental design most commonly used by gerontologists.

As in previous versions (1,2), additional external information (including homologues, cytogenetic information, gene ontology annotation, protein-protein interaction data and sequence information) and links are also incorporated in GenAge.

GenDR

genomics of DR

DR, of which caloric restriction is the most widely studied regimen, is the most robust non-genetic intervention shown to extend lifespan in a multitude of species, from yeast to mammals (12,14). However, the exact mechanisms of how DR extends lifespan remain unknown. To decipher the mechanisms of DR in a systematic fashion, we established GenDR (http://genomics.senescence.info/ diet/), the first database of DR-associated genes. Because GenDR and related analysis of DR networks have been recently described elsewhere (15), they will only be briefly To create GenDR, we compiled from the literature a list of DR-essential genes from model organisms. DR-essential genes were defined as those which, if genetically modified, interfere with DR-mediated lifespan extension and, ideally, do not affect the lifespan of animals on an ad libitum diet (or at least do not appear to be merely causing disease). A subset of these genes act as genetic DR mimetics, as their manipulation leads to an increased lifespan for ad libitum fed animals, which is not further extended by DR. One such example is the growth hormone receptor gene in mice (16), in fact the only mouse gene currently in GenDR. In GenDR, the respective homologues of DR-essential genes are included for all the common model organisms, as well as for humans (15). A complementary data set in GenDR is a list of genes consistently differentially expressed in mammals under DR.

In a recent meta-analysis, a common signature of genes differentially expressed in DR across different mammalian species, strains, tissues and experiments was derived. This signature provides a set of genes that are most robustly responding to DR (17).

Presently, build 1 of GenDR features 158 DR-essential genes plus 173 genes that are part of the conserved molecular signature of DR in mammals. We hope that GenDR will help decipher DR-mediated life extension and promote the development of pharmacological DR mimetics with clinical applications (12). Importantly, GenDR has been fully integrated in HAGR with abundant cross-links between GenDR and GenAge.

Enhancing data quality in AnAge, the database of animal ageing and longevity As previously mentioned, the AnAge database (http:// genomics.senescence.info/species/) hosts ageing-related observations, longevity records and a multitude of additional data (including developmental and reproductive traits, taxonomic information and basic metabolic characteristics) for >4000 animal species. Since its inception (1), the main focus of AnAge has been on longevity data and in particular on the quality of data on maximum longevity, rather than merely taking the highest value that is error prone (18). AnAge includes a qualifier of confidence in the data, an estimate of sample size to aid the use of longevity data in comparative studies of ageing, whether maximum longevity comes from a specimen kept in captivity or from the wild and the specific source of the longevity record. Longevity records are manually curated and, if necessary, evaluated by contacting experts (veterinarians, zoologists, etc.) with first-hand experience in a given taxa to assess the reliability of the data, as previously described (18). Anecdotes, unverified longevity claims and controversial issues are mentioned as additional observations. As such, AnAge is arguably the 'gold standard' longevity data in animals.

To assist and facilitate comparative studies of ageing, quantitative data on other traits that often correlate with longevity are also included in AnAge, but these are often taken from other data compilations (19)(20)(21)(22)(23)(24)(25). Nonetheless, a variety of automated quality control procedures are in place to detect potential errors in all data in AnAge (18).

The focus of AnAge has always been on vertebrates and on mammals in particular. AnAge features higher quality data from mammals, also because they tend to be subjected to more studies than other taxa. At present (build 12), AnAge features data for 4205 species, of which >1000 species are mammals, but also, >1000 species of birds, >500 reptiles, nearly 200 amphibians and nearly 1000 fish species (Table 3) are present. Seventeen other classes, each represented by only a few species in AnAge (maximum lifespan ranging from 0.16 to 15 000 years) have been excluded from Table 3.

As AnAge also serves as an informational website for research on ageing, traditional biomedical model organisms, including yeast and invertebrates, are featured. In fact, all species for which there are ageing-or DR-associated genes are present in AnAge with various cross-links between AnAge and HAGR's gene-centric databases.