Although in terms of content, AnAge has grown only slightly, we have consistently continued to curate its data and enhance its quality. Additionally, new information and references have also been added to AnAge entries. Specifically, we added a modest 109 new species (mostly birds: 91), suggesting that AnAge may be reaching saturation in terms of reflecting the available quality data on longevity of vertebrates and of mammals in particular. Indeed, of the hundreds of longevity records and entries updated, the vast majority (87%) were from birds. This is mostly because of the continually breaking of longevity records in the wild from various banding studies (26,27). In addition, ample information and >200 references have been added, and >1000 references are now cited in AnAge. The information provided for the most important organisms for research on ageing has also been expanded. For example, in the case of the traditional biomedical model organisms, additional information on ageing phenotypes and/or age-related changes and pathologies has been added, and AnAge thus serves as a reference for the organisms mentioned in GenAge and GenDR.

Overall, AnAge continues to be the reference longevity database for comparative and evolutionary studies of ageing. Although its coverage appears to be reaching saturation, at least for mammals, data quality continues to be improved with more information added and more studies cited (in total, HAGR now includes observations for >1950 species). Like for all HAGR databases, AnAge's interface has been greatly improved, while maintaining a familiar functionality, and cross-links with other databases has been expanded. Lastly, AnAge has also proven valuable for a variety of studies in other areas, from conservation studies to various evolutionary analyses that use the comparative method and/or benefit from longevity data.

Other informational resources

Associated with HAGR is senescence.info (http://www. senescence.info), which aims to provide an informational repository on the science of ageing. Since its creation, senescence.info has continually grown and has been recently updated. We hope that it provides a comprehensive introduction to biogerontology, for both scientists and non-scientists alike, covering a wide range of aspects of ageing research and its social implications. The senescence.info website is also an important resource for students and educators and is a source of teaching materials for various courses on ageing. However, contrary to HAGR, which involves several curators and experts, senescence.info is developed by only one of us (J.P.M. ).

A complementary resource to HAGR is the Who's Who in Gerontology website (http://whoswho.senescence.info/), based around the WhosAge database, which contains information on individuals, mainly researchers, and companies working on ageing and lifespan extension. At the time of writing, WhosAge contains information for 262 researchers and 22 companies working on ageing and related fields. During the development of HAGR, a series of software programs (mostly Perl and SPSS scripts) have been also created to help our team in a variety of bioinformatic analyses, such as demographic analysis of age-related mortality (28), a repository of which is available to users as well (http://genomics.senescence.info/software/).

NEW AND IMPROVED INTERFACE

HAGR has grown extensively since it was first published, encompassing more data on ageing and incorporating new databases. One of the key problems that sites encounter when they have grown so rapidly over time is a steady decline in their usability and navigation: sections become harder to discover and navigational features become overloaded. To address and significantly improve these issues, we have completely redesigned the HAGR interface and added many new features.

The redesign has overhauled the interface, giving it a new visual look that is more consistent and helps tie each of the resources into a single cohesive piece, as well as improving the navigation to enhance the discoverability of sections. There are now two parts to the navigation, the first being the global navigation bar, which is present across the top of each page in HAGR. This provides quick and consistent navigation to each section, as well as integration for the database-specific searches into a single location. It also provides links to external ageing resources that are relevant, including the Digital Ageing Atlas-a portal of ageing-related changes, which is currently under development (http://ageing-map.org)-senescence.info and the WhosAge database. Finally, the new design provides a global search function that can query each database in HAGR, providing a simple way of searching the data in HAGR without knowing exactly which database is relevant. To complement the global navigation bar, each page contains a left navigation bar that contains context-specific links and information related to the current page. For instance, while using the model organisms' gene section in GenAge, the navigation contains search functions and links to tools related to this data set ( Figure 1). This, combined with the greater clarity and structure that the visual refresh provides, makes it much easier for users to find the relevant section and information.

All data sets in HAGR have been better integrated and linked to each other, and each gene entry now contains direct links to all other relevant entries in HAGR's data sets. For example, researchers can quickly see from GenAge if homologues, from the InParanoid database (29), for a model organism gene are present in the human ageing gene set as well or if the gene is present in GenDR. Species information can also be easily accessed through links to AnAge.

While each database was adapted to the new visual style, GenAge was given some further enhancements to help improve the quality of the information within, as mentioned earlier. To support these changes, the search function has gained the ability to filter and sort by organisms and gene annotations (observations of 'increased' or 'decreased' lifespan effect, and pro-and anti-longevity designations), allowing for a quicker identification of the gene(s) of interest. When presenting search results, if a gene has multiple observations, all suggesting the same effect on lifespan, that effect and the highest observed value will be shown (and implicitly used for filtering).

Another resource that has been completely redesigned is Who's Who in Gerontology, which has seen changes both to the interface and to its available features. The section focused on individuals has gained a density map indicating the number of researchers working on ageing in each country, as well as a better indication for each person of which country they are currently working in. Each company also now lists their approximate location on a map. These new features combined with a new cleaner design make the Who's Who resource much easier to use, as well as providing more information than previously.

AVAILABILITY

Same as with our previous access policy, the collection of databases in HAGR is freely available at http://genomics. senescence.info. For all databases, we also provide users with the possibility to export, download and reuse the data for their own analyses, under a Creative Commons Attribution license. Feedback via email is heartily welcome, and we encourage the subscription to the HAGR mailing list to be informed of major updates and changes in HAGR.

CONCLUDING REMARKS

Since its creation, HAGR has proved to be a widely used science of ageing portal with much needed resources for biogerontologists. Both GenAge and AnAge have been featured in a number of other databases and resources, and HAGR has been cited >200 times (Table 4). For example, GenAge has been used as the basis for all the longevity networks hosted in the NetAge database [(30); http://netage-project.org], is featured in JenaLib [(31); http://www.fli-leibniz.de/IMAGE.html] and participates in LinkOut from NCBI resources like OMIM and Entrez Gene (32). AnAge is a content partner of the Encyclopedia of Life (http://eol.org), and its data have also been incorporated into the Biology of Ageing Overall, the current version of the HAGR provides users with a new intuitive interface, significantly augmented information content in the rapidly evolving field of ageing and a better integration of its resources. It is fitting that as a resource for the systems biology of ageing, HAGR has become a resource in which the whole is greater than the sum of its parts. Developments in high-throughput approaches, such as recent advances in next-generation sequencing (34), promise to continue generating ever greater amounts of data in biogerontology that we expect HAGR to continue to accommodate, and thus, we anticipate HAGR to steadily grow.

We hope that these and other ongoing improvements will further enhance the use of HAGR's collection of databases and allow HAGR to continue to be the leading online resource for biogerontology.

( http://biologyofaging.org) portal, the Animal Diversity Web (http://animaldiversity.ummz.umich.edu) and the Comparative Cellular and Molecular Biology of Longevity Database [(33); http://genomics.brocku.ca/ ccmbl/].

Table 1 . 1Gene data sets in GenAgeGene set Description