c Comparison of the median log 2 FC and distribution of log 2 FC with age between the CS genes and all protein-coding genes in human tissues. Red tiles indicate that the median log 2 FC of the CellAge and CS genes is higher than the median log 2 FC of all protein-coding genes for that tissue, while blue tiles indicate that the median log 2 FC of the CS genes is lower than the median genome log 2 FC. Asterisks (*) indicate significant differences between the log 2 FC distribution with age of CS genes and the log 2 FC distribution with age of all protein-coding genes for that tissue (p < 0.05, Wilcoxon rank sum test with BH correction) (Additional file 1: Table S16). d CellAge genes differentially expressed in at least two tissues with age. Gray tiles are genes which had low basal expression levels in the given tissue and were filtered out before the differential gene expression analysis was carried out [32]. Colored tiles indicate significant differential expression with age (p < 0.05, moderated ttest with BH correction, abs(50*log 2 FC) > log 2 (1.5)). Numbers by gene names in brackets denote the number of tissues differentially expressing the CellAge gene with age.

Red gene names specify that the CellAge gene was significantly overexpressed with age in more tissues than expected by chance, while blue gene names show the CellAge genes significantly underexpressed with age in more tissues than expected by chance (p < 0.05, random gene expression tissue overlap simulations) (Additional file 1: Table S17 -S20). Liver, pancreas, pituitary, spleen, small intestine, and vagina did not have any significant CS DEGs with age ABI3, CDKN1A, CYR61, DDB2, MATK, PIK3R5, VENTX, HK3, SIK1, and SOX2, while PTTG1, DHCR24, IL8, and PIM1 were underexpressed in significantly more tissues (Additional file 1: Table S18; Additional file 2: Fig. S5D). ZMAT3 and EPHA3 were the two CS inhibitors overexpressed in significantly more tissues with age than expected by chance, while CDK1, AURKA, BMI1, BRCA1, EZH2, FOXM1, HJURP, MAD2L1, SNAI1, and VEGFA were underexpressed in significantly more tissues. We also performed simulations to determine the likelihood of gene expression signatures of CS being differentially expressed with age in multiple human tissues by chance (Additional file 1: Table S19): less than 5% of the genes in the CS signatures are expected by chance to be overexpressed with age in more than three tissues or underexpressed with age in more than two tissues.

A total of 46 CS signature genes (29 overexpressed, 17 underexpressed) were overexpressed with age in significantly more tissues than expected by chance, and 139 CS signature genes were underexpressed in more tissues than expected by chance (26 overexpressed genes in CS, 113 underexpressed genes in CS) (Additional file 1: Table S20).

Do CS and longevity genes associate with aging-related disease genes?

A previous paper [34] grouped 769 aging-related diseases (ARDs) into 6 NIH Medical Subject Heading (MeSH) classes [44] based on data from the Genetic Association Database [45]: cardiovascular diseases (CVD), immune system diseases (ISD), musculoskeletal diseases (MSD), nutritional and metabolic diseases (NMD), neoplastic diseases (NPD), and nervous system diseases (NSD). The same approach was used to build the HAGR aging-related disease gene selection tool (http://genomics.senescence.info/diseases/ gene_set.php), which we used to obtain the ARD genes for each disease class and overlap with the CellAge genes.

There were links between the CellAge genes and NPD genes, which is expected given the anti-tumor role of senescence (Additional file 1: Table S21). Without accounting for publication bias (i.e., some genes being more studied than others), all ARD classes are significantly associated with CellAge genes, with lower commonalities with diseases affecting mostly non-proliferating tissue such as NSD. NPD genes are even more overrepresented in the GenAge human dataset, which could suggest commonality between aging and senescence through cancer-related pathways. Both the strong association of NPD genes with Gen-Age and senescence, and the strong link between GenAge and all ARD classes is interesting. Indeed, longevityassociated genes have been linked to cancer-associated genes in previous papers [46]. Considering age is the leading risk factor for ARD [47,48], the results from GenAge support the previously tested conjecture that there are (i) at least a few genes shared by all or most ARD classes; and (ii) those genes are also related to aging in general [34]. We also looked for genes that are shared across multiple disease classes and are also recorded as CS genes. CellAge genes shared across multiple ARD classes included VEGFA and IFNG (5 ARD classes), SERPINE1, MMP9, and AR (4 ARD classes), and CDKN2A (3 ARD classes). Results are summarized in Additional file 2: Fig. S6.

Are CS genes associated with cancer genes?

Cellular senescence is widely thought to be an anti-cancer mechanism [49]. Therefore, the CellAge senescence inducers and inhibitors of senescence were overlapped with oncogenes from the tumor-suppressor gene (TSG) database (TSGene 2.0) (n = 1018) [50] and the ONGene database (n = 698) [51] (Additional file 1: Table S22 -S27). The number of significant genes overlapping are shown in Fig. 3a, while the significant p values from the overlap analysis are shown in Fig. 3b (p < 0.05, Fisher's exact test with BH correction). The significant overlap between CellAge genes and cancer indicates a close relationship between both processes. Specifically, the overlap between CellAge inhibitors and oncogenes, and the overlap between CellAge inducers and TSGs were more significant, with lower p values and larger odds ratios (Fig. 3) [52]. This analysis was repeated after filtering out CellAge genes that were only shown to induce senescence in fibroblasts. The overlaps were still significant after FDR correction, indicating that the overlap between CellAge and cancer genes is not specific to genes controlling CS in fibroblasts (CS inducers with oncogenes: n = 10, p = 9e−05; with TSGs: n = 23, p = 4e−12. CS inhibitors with oncogenes: n = 17, 1e−12; with TSGs: n = 8, p = 9e−04, p < 0.05, Fisher's exact test with BH correction) (Additional file 2: Fig. S7).

Gene ontology (GO) enrichment analyses were performed using WebGestalt to identify the function of the overlapping genes [38]. Overlapping genes between CellAge senescence inducers and TSGs were enriched in GO terms related to p53 signalling and cell cycle phase transition (Additional file 2: Fig. S8A). The enriched functions of overlapping genes between CellAge senescence inducers and oncogenes were mainly related to immune system processes and response to stress (Additional file 2: Fig. S8B). Overlapping genes between CellAge senescence inhibitors and TSGs were enriched in only 5 terms, which are cellular response to oxygen-containing compound, positive regulation of chromatin organization, and terms relating to female sex differentiation (Additional file 2: Fig. S8C). Finally, overlapping genes between CellAge senescence inhibitors and oncogenes were related to processes such as negative regulation of nucleic acid-templated transcription, cellular response to stress, and cell proliferation (Additional file 2: Fig. S8D). All of the functional enrichment data can be found in Additional file 1: Table S28 -S31.

Network analyses

The CellAge genes form both protein-protein and gene co-expression networks. The formation of a proteinprotein interaction (PPI) network is significant in itself given that only~4% of the genes in a randomly chosen gene dataset of similar size are interconnected [53]. In order to have a more holistic view of CS, we were interested in the topological parameters of the networks that CS genes form. For this, several types of networks were constructed using the CellAge genes as seeds: the CS PPI network, along with two CS gene co-expression networks built using RNA-seq and microarray data. Biological networks generally have a scale-free topology in which the majority of genes (nodes) have few interactions (edges), while some have many more interactions, resulting in a power law distribution of the node degree (the number of interactions per node) [31,54]. As expected, the node-degree distribution of the above networks does confirm a scale-free structure (Additional file 2: Fig. S9). Additional file 1: Table S32 presents the network summary statistics for the resulting networks.

The network parameters we looked at were as follows: Degree, Betweenness Centrality (BC), Closeness Centrality (CC), and Increased Connectivity (IC). The degree is the number of interactions per node and nodes with high degree scores are termed network hubs. BC is a measure of the proportion of shortest paths between all node pairs in the network that cross the node in question. The nodes with high BC are network bottlenecks and may connect large portions of the network which would not otherwise communicate effectively or may monitor information flow from disparate regions in the network [31]. CC is a measure of how close a certain node is to all other nodes and is calculated with the inverse of the sum of the shortest paths to all other nodes. Lower CC scores indicate that nodes are more central to the network, while high CC scores indicate the node may be on the periphery of the network and thus less central. The IC for each node measures the statistical significance for any overrepresentation of interactions between a given node and a specific subset of nodes (in our case CellAge proteins) when compared to what is expected by chance. Taken together, genes that score highly for degree, BC, CC, and IC within the senescence networks are likely important regulators of CS even if up until now they have not been identified as CS genes.