Looking at the topology of CS networks, the PPI network, microarray-based co-expression network, and RNA-seq coexpression network all possess comparable scale-free structures. However, gene co-expression data is less influenced by publication bias. This is particularly important considering published literature often reports positive proteinprotein interactions over protein interactions that do not exist [55]. The lack of negative results for protein interaction publications complicates the interpretation of PPI networks even more, as the absence of edges in networks does not necessarily mean they do not exist. On the other hand, RNA-seq and microarray co-expression data, while not influenced by publication bias, does not give indications of actual experimentally demonstrated interactions (physical or genetic). Furthermore, RNA read counts do not directly correlate to protein numbers, with previous studies reporting that only 40% of the variation in protein concentration can be attributed to mRNA levels, an important aspect to consider when interpreting RNA-seq data [56]. Finally, the microarray network was constructed using the COXPRESdb (V6), which contains 73,083 human samples and offered another degree of validation [57]. Although RNA-seq reportedly detects more DEGs including ncRNAs [58], GeneFriends [59] contains 4133 human samples, far less than the microarray database from COXPRESdb.

The protein-protein interaction network associated with CS

We only used interactions from human proteins to build the CellAge PPI network. The network was built by taking the CellAge genes, their first-order partners and the interactions between them from the BioGrid database. The CellAge PPI network comprised of 2487 nodes across four disjointed components, three of which only comprised of two nodes each, and the main component containing 2481 nodes.

The genes with the highest degree scores were TP53, HDAC1, BRCA1, EP300, and MDM2. These same genes also ranked in the top five CC. Expectedly, several of these genes also possessed the highest BC: TP53, BRCA1, HDAC1, and MDM2 (with BAG3, a gene with a slightly smaller degree also within the top 5). On the other hand, the genes ranked by top 5 IC were CCND1, CCND2, CDKN2A, SP1, and EGR1. Of note among these nodes, EP300, MDM2, CCND2, and EGR1 were not already present in CellAge. Additional file 2: Fig. S10 summarizes the gene intersection across the computed network parameters, while Additional file 1: Table S33 identifies potential senescence regulators not already present in CellAge from the PPI network. We found that from the top 12 PPI candidates, 11 have been recently shown to regulate senescence in human cell lines and will be added to CellAge build 2.

Within the main PPI network component, a large portion of CS genes and their partners formed a single large module with 1595 nodes. Using DAVID version 6.8, we found the terms enriched within the module; the top five are: Transcription, DNA damage & repair, cell cycle, Proteasome & ubiquitin, and ATP pathway [35,36] (Additional file 1: Table S34). These results are all in line with previously described hallmarks of cellular senescence [60].

It is prudent to note that centrality measures in PPI networks must be interpreted with caution due to publication bias that can be an inherent part of the network [61,62]. The top network genes identified from the PPI network are likely to be heavily influenced by publication bias [63]. Looking at the average PubMed hits of the gene symbol in the title or abstract revealed a mean result count of approximately 2897 per gene, far higher than the genome average (136) or existing CellAge genes (712) (Additional file 2: Fig. S11).

Unweighted RNA

Seq co

expression network

We used CellAge genes that induce and inhibit CS and their co-expressing partners to build a cellular senescence co-expression network. The network consists of a main connected network with 3198 nodes, and a number of smaller "islands" that are not connected to the main network (Fig. 4a).

The main interconnected network included 130 Cel-lAge genes. Among these, we also found that 14% of them are also human aging-related genes, reported in GenAge -Human dataset, whereas the remainder of the smaller networks only comprised of 1.6% longevity genes [64]. Next, we looked at a number of centrality parameters to see how CellAge genes are characterized compared to the entire network. CellAge genes had a mean BC of 0.00363, whereas the remainder of the genes had a BC of 0.00178, revealing that if CellAge genes are removed, modules within the network may become disconnected more easily. While nodes scoring highly for BC in PPI networks are likely bottleneck regulators of gene expression, this is not necessarily true for coexpression networks. In this case, nodes can also have high BC scores if they are co-activated via various signalling pathways. Although BC alone is not enough to determine which genes are regulating CS, taking BC into account with other network topological parameters can be a good indicator of gene function. Aside from high BC, CellAge genes also had a lower local clustering coefficient of 0.58, compared to a mean of 0.76 across non-CellAge genes, indicating that locally, CellAge genes connect to other genes less than the average for the network. This can also be seen at the degree level, where CellAge genes averaged only 53 connections, compared to an average of 103 connections in non-CellAge genes.

Finally, the mean CC score was not significantly different between CellAge nodes and other genes in the network (0.148 in CellAge vs 0.158). CellAge genes were therefore more likely to be bottlenecks in signalling across different modules and occupy localized areas with lower network redundancy, suggesting that perturbations in their expression might have a greater impact on linking different underlying cellular processes.

The topological analysis of the main network component as a whole revealed a more modular topology than the PPI network, resulting in genes tending not to appear in multiple measures of centrality. There were 23 nodes with significant IC with senescence-related genes, including PTPN6, LAPTM5, CORO1A, CCNB2 and HPF1. No node from the top 5 IC was present in the top 5 genes with high BC, CC, or Degree. Overall, the primary candidates of interest included KDM4C, which had a significant IC and was at the top 1% of CC and top 5% of BC, along with PTPN6, SASH3 and ARHGAP30, which all had significant IC values and were at the top  Table S35, genes in Additional file 1: Table S36). b RNA-Seq Unweighted Co-expression Network, local clustering. Red/Orange represents nodes with high clustering coefficient, whereas pale green represents nodes with lower clustering coefficient. Degree is also weighted using node size. CellAge nodes are colored purple, and GenAge Human nodes are also shown and highlighted in bright green. The right-hand panel is an enlarged view of the left-hand panel 5% of BC. We found that KDM4C and PTPN6 have been shown to regulate CS in human cell lines, and will be added to build 2 of CellAge [65,66].

Previous studies have advocated that measures of centrality are generally important to identify key network components, with BC being one of the most common measures. However, it has also been postulated mathematically that intra-modular BC is more important than intermodular BC [67]. Therefore, by isolating network clusters of interest and identifying genes with high BC or centrality within submodules, we propose to identify new senescence regulators from the co-expression network.

Using the CytoCluster app (see Networks in Methods) [68], we found 54 clusters in the network, of which we represent the top clusters colored according to modularity (Module 1-16) or size (Module 17-19) (Fig. 4a). Reactome pathway enrichment for all main clusters highlighted cell cycle and immune system terms in the two largest clusters [35,36]. The largest cluster of 460 nodes (17 CellAge nodes, Module 4), possessed a high modularity score and was strongly associated with cell cycle genes, including the following general terms: Cell Cycle; Cell Cycle, Mitotic; Mitotic Prometaphase; Resolution of Sister Chromatid Cohesion; and DNA Repair. The second largest cluster (Module 16), however, had weak modularity (ranking 26); it comprised of 450 nodes (19 CellAge nodes) and was enriched for immunerelated pathways including: Adaptive Immune System; Innate Immune System; Immunoregulatory interactions between a Lymphoid and a non-Lymphoid cell; Neutrophil degranulation; and Cytokine Signaling in Immune system. Cluster 4 and Cluster 5 were not enriched for Reactome Pathways. A visual inspection showed a number of bottleneck genes between Module 1 and Module 16, consistent with the role of the immune system in clearance and surveillance of senescence cells and the secretion of immunomodulators by senescent cells [69] (Additional file 1: Table S35).

We were also interested in visualizing areas in the network with a high local clustering coefficient, as this parameter represents areas with many neighborhood interactions and, therefore, more robust areas in the network. It was found that the two clusters of interest, enriched for cell cycle terms and immune system terms, overlapped with regions of lower clustering coefficient, potentially implying parts of the biological system with less redundancy in the underlying process. Figure 4b depicts regions of high local clustering coefficient in the network (orange) and regions less well connected locally (green).

Unweighted microarray co

expression network