CS genes are not expressed in a tissue-specific manner (Additional file 1: Table S11; Additional file 2: Fig. S4) and less than half of the CS genes undergo a significant change in expression with age ( Fig. 2; Additional file 2: Fig. S5A), suggesting that the pathways triggering differential expression of CS genes with age are shared between cells across tissues. Indeed, we found that CDKN2A was overexpressed in 19 human tissues with age, albeit only significantly so in 10 of the tissues (Additional file 1: Table  S18) [32]. Nonetheless, across all simulations, CS genes significantly overexpressed across multiple tissues with age by chance never exceeded seven tissues ( Fig. 2d; Additional file 1: Table S17 and S19). The significant increase in CDKN2A expression across a significant number of human tissues with age is an indicator that at least some cell types are undergoing CS with age. ZMAT3, an inhibitor of CS, was also significantly overexpressed with age in seven tissues, including blood vessel, lung, and prostate, which also had significant increases in CDKN2A expression. Indeed, both ZMAT3 and CDKN2A were overexpressed across the majority of GTEx tissues with age (Additional file 2: Fig. S5D). Furthermore,~40% of the CellAge database was compiled using experiments exclusively in human fibroblast cell lines. Of the 20 studies used to compile the signatures of CS, 10 also performed gene manipulation experiments on fibroblasts [32].

Fibroblasts are present in connective tissues found between other tissue types across the human body, and the tissue samples analyzed to compile GTEx likely contained fibroblast gene expression. This may partially explain the lack of tissue-specific CellAge genes. It is further unclear whether the trends in differential expression of the Cel-lAge genes we see across aged human tissue samples is a result of fibroblast senescence, or if heterogenous gene populations are undergoing CS. We have partially addressed this issue by doing subgroup analysis of CellAge genes confirmed to control senescence outside of fibroblast cell lines and found that the overlap between these genes and both the signatures of aging and cancer genes is still significant.

We found a strong association between senescence and neoplastic diseases (Additional file 1: Table S21). This is not surprising given the known role of senescence in tumor suppression. Some CS genes were also shared between many of the ARD classes. These results are in line with a previous analysis investigating the relationship between CS and ARD genes carried out using different datasets [53]. Tacutu et al reported significant overlaps (i.e., 138 genes -53%in common between CS and cancer vs 21-8%between CellAge and neoplasms); many more than we did. The study found that many genes shared between CS and several non-cancer ARDs are also involved in cancer. While removing cancer genes from our ARD dataset did not result in such a striking effect, it nonetheless substantially cut the number of overlaps to a statistically insignificant level, adding weight to the hypothesis that cancer genes have a bridging role between CS and ARDs. Furthermore, we found a significant overlap between both the CellAge inhibitors and inducers of senescence, and oncogenes and TSG (Fig. 3). Genes that induce senescence, however, tended to be tumor suppressors, while genes that inhibit senescence tended to be oncogenes, a finding that is consistent with the classical view of cellular senescence as a tumor-suppressor mechanism.

We next explored what information could be obtained by applying a network analysis to CellAge. From the list of CellAge genes, three networks of CS were generated: a PPI network and two co-expression networks, with the aim of identifying new senescence regulators based primarily on network centrality of the genes.

The examination of the PPI network to identify possible regulators based on centrality revealed 25 central genes in the network, ranking in the top 1% in at least two network topological parameters (degree, BC, CC, or IC) (Additional file 1: Table S33). However, 13 of these genes are already in the CellAge database, and we found 11 of these genes have already been shown to drive CS in human cell lines and will be added into build 2 of CellAge.

We looked at the RNA-Seq co-expression network in detail, using the main connected component of 3198 genes to find highly central genes to the network as a whole, and those occupying subnetworks of interest. The RNA-Seq was a highly modular network, separated into some subnetworks of distinct functions (Fig. 4). The two largest and more central networks contained a number of known senescence genes. We expanded the analysis of these networks in particular, identifying a number of bottleneck nodes. Cluster 1 was enriched for cell cycle processes, which is not overly surprising given that senescence involves changes in cell cycle progression. However, cluster 2 comprised of enriched terms relating to immune system function. One of the aims in biogerontology is to understand and reverse the effects of aging on the immune system. Additional file 1: Table S38 highlights the genes in both clusters that are potential CS bottlenecks within the network and may warrant further study.

Using siRNAs, we were able to test the potential role of 26 gene candidates in inhibiting senescence (Fig. 5). The list of candidates was primarily compiled using CellAge inhibitors as seeds to generate co-expressed genes in Gen-eFriends, a collection of RNA-seq co-expression data [59] (Additional file 1: Table S43). Of the 26 genes, 13 were top hits, decreasing cell number, altering at least one morphological measure, and activating the p16 and/or p21 pathway. Additional file 1: Table S45 highlights the four CS candidates we found that have not yet been associated with senescence. We have showcased how co-expression networks can be used to accurately infer senescence gene candidates, which can then be experimentally verified.

Conclusion

Overall, our CellAge database is the first comprehensive cellular senescence database, which will be a major resource for researchers to understand the role of senescence in aging and disease. Besides, we found that CS genes are conserved in vertebrates but not invertebrates and that genes related to the CS tend not to be tissuespecific. We observed that genes inducing CS trended towards upregulation with age across most human tissues, and these genes are overrepresented in both antilongevity and tumor-suppressing gene datasets, while genes inhibiting senescence were not overexpressed with age and were overrepresented in pro-longevity and oncogene datasets. CS genes were also overrepresented in genes linked to aging-related diseases, primarily in neoplasms.

Using network biology, we implicated the CellAge genes in various processes, particularly cell division and immune system processes. We used network topology to identify potential regulators of CS and bottlenecks that could impact various downstream processes if deregulated. Indeed, we identified 11 genes that have already been shown to contribute towards CS, which will be added to future versions of CellAge. Finally, we experimentally verified 26 genes that induce CS morphology or biomarkers when knocked down in human mammary fibroblasts. Of these, 13 genes (C9orf40, CDC25A, CDCA4, CKAP2, GTF3C4, HAUS4, IMMT, MCM7, MTHFD2, MYBL2, NEK2, NIPA2, and TCEB3) were strong hits in inducing a senescent phenotype.

Cellular senescence is one of the hallmarks of aging [87] and the accumulation of senescent cells in human tissues with age has been implicated as a driver of agingrelated diseases. Indeed, pharmacological approaches targeting senescent cells, like senolytics, are a major and timely area of research that could result in human clinical applications [5,88]. It is imperative that we fully understand and deconstruct cellular senescence in order to target aging-related diseases. We hope that CellAge will help researchers understand the role that CS plays in aging and aging-related diseases and contributes to the development of drugs and strategies to ameliorate the detrimental effects of senescent cells.

Methods

CellAge compilation

CellAge was compiled following a scientific literature search, manual curation, and annotation, with genes being appended to the database if they met the following criteria:

Only gene manipulation experiments (gene knockout, gene knockdown, partial or full loss-of-function mutations, overexpression or drug-modulation) were used to identify the role of the genes in cellular senescence. The search focussed on genes from genetic manipulation experiments to ensure objectivity in the selection process. The genetic manipulation caused cells to induce or inhibit the CS process in the lab. Cellular senescence was detected by growth arrest, increased SA-βgalactosidase activity, SA-heterochromatin foci, a decrease in BrdU incorporation, changes in morphology, and/or specific gene expression signatures. The experiments were performed in primary, immortalized, or cancer human cell lines.

40% of the experiments were conducted exclusively in fibroblasts. The data was compiled from 230 references. The curated database comprises cell senescence genes together with a number of additional annotations useful in understanding the context of each identified CS gene (Additional file 1: Table S46).