The presented pathways are grouped by categories and include the following: 1) preselected pathways that had been previously shown to be associated with longevity (by independent studies), and 2) additional pathways identified by the current analysis to be associated significantly with MLS in at least four organs. Quantitative details on pathway score associations with other species features can be found in Supplementary Table S3. (a,b) Red represents significant positive associations for genes or pathways; blue represents significant negative associations. Colorless represents no significant associations found in this study.

Linear Relationships between Maximum Lifespan and Pathway Enrichment Scores

In order to expand our perspective from individual genes to biological pathways, we used the signature projection approach (ssGSEA) to assess the association between pathway activity (estimated from gene expression) in various organs and MLS (Figure 2b). The ssGSEA method allows for transforming the gene expression space into the biological pathways' activity space using prior knowledge in the form of gene-pathway association sets. For this, we first selected a list of pathways, such as the mTOR signaling pathway (hsa04150), Insulin signaling pathway (hsa04910), DNA repair pathways (e.g., base exci-  Supplementary Table S2). (b) Top linear correlations for MLS and pathway enrichment scores. The heatmap represents the significant associations between MLS and the computed enrichment score (ES) for pathways, obtained using the signature projection approach, which takes into account the expression of all the expressed genes belonging to each pathway. The presented pathways are grouped by categories and include the following: 1) preselected pathways that had been previously shown to be associated with longevity (by independent studies), and 2) additional pathways identified by the current analysis to be associated significantly with MLS in at least four organs. Quantitative details on pathway score associations with other species features can be found in Supplementary Table S3.

(a,b) Red represents significant positive associations for genes or pathways; blue represents significant negative associations. Colorless represents no significant associations found in this study.

Linear Relationships between Maximum Lifespan and Pathway Enrichment Scores

In order to expand our perspective from individual genes to biological pathways, we used the signature projection approach (ssGSEA) to assess the association between pathway activity (estimated from gene expression) in various organs and MLS (Figure 2b). The ssGSEA method allows for transforming the gene expression space into the biological pathways' activity space using prior knowledge in the form of gene-pathway association sets. For this, we first selected a list of pathways, such as the mTOR signaling pathway (hsa04150), Insulin signaling pathway (hsa04910), DNA repair pathways (e.g., base excision repair (hsa03410), homologous recombination (hsa03440)), ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis (hsa04120), focal adhesion (hsa04510), etc., which have already been linked to aging or longevity [2,18,19], and then we applied ssGSEA to them.

Interestingly, no significant association was identified for the mTOR pathway, suggesting perhaps that the MLS modulation by mTOR is working amongst the individuals of one species rather than optimizing MLS at the inter-species level, or through other mechanisms such as post-translational modification (e.g., phosphorylation). Contrastingly, for the genes involved in the insulin pathway, we did identify a positive association for the kidney (p = 0.005). We also identified multiple strong positive associations of the enrichment score (ES) for several of the DNA repair pathways in the brain: mismatch repair (MMR) (p = 3.27 × 10 −5 ), nucleotide excision repair (NER) (p = 8.35 × 10 −5 ), base excision repair (BER) (p = 5.46 × 10 −11 ), homologous recombination (HR) (p = 6.64 × 10 −7 ), non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ) (p = 4.60 × 10 −8 ). Besides the brain, the BER pathway also shows a significant positive association in both liver (p = 1.27 × 10 −6 ) and kidney (p = 0.001), while for the HR pathway the ES is significantly associated only in the liver (p = 0.003).

For the ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis, we identified a small negative association in liver (p = 2.88 × 10 −5 ) and brain (p = 6 × 10 −4 ), but also for the proteasome pathway in liver (p = 0.01), whereas for the ubiquinone and other terpenoid-quinone biosynthesis pathways, we found strong negative associations in the liver (p = 1.64 × 10 −9 ), kidney (p = 0.001), brain (p = 6.82 × 10 −9 ) and heart (p = 1.52 × 10 −5 ). Focusing on cell adhesion, the focal adhesion pathway displays a small but highly significant positive association, which was detected in the liver (p = 1.39 × 10 −5 ) and kidney (p = 7 × 10 −4 ), and for cell adhesion molecules associations were found in the liver (p = 9.71 × 10 −7 ), brain (p = 0.02) and kidney (p = 2.70 × 10 −6 ). Besides exploring the pathways known to be associated with longevity, we also investigated the pathways that were detected to have significant correlations consistently, i.e., with the same direction of the association, in at least four out of five organs. A set of KEGG pathways involved in infection, inflammation, and the immune response were found to be associated with MLS in multiple organs (Figure 2b), including allograft rejection, asthma, autoimmune thyroid disease, complement and coagulation cascades, influenza A, intestinal immune network for IgA production, measles, systemic lupus erythematosus, and viral myocarditis.

To our knowledge, these pathways have not been established as longevity pathways; however, upregulation of the immune response and inflammation with MLS has been shown in both cross-species transcriptomics [9], as well as in studies of long-living animals such as naked mole-rats [10,20]. Enrichment for pathways that are specific to humans (e.g., measles) can be found because of genes from the corresponding gene sets that are involved more generally in inflammation and immunity (e.g., IL-2, IFNα/β). Three pathways involved in metabolism were found to be negatively associated with MLS: fatty acid metabolism, glutathione metabolism, and glycerolipid metabolism. Previous studies have shown a positive association of membrane fatty acid composition [21], and a negative association of glutathione levels in the liver, with lifespan in vertebrates [22]. A negative association of glycerolipid metabolism with lifespan was also found in a cross-species lipidomics study [23]. We also found a negative association for the PPAR signaling pathway. PPARs play an important role in regulating metabolism, and several PPARs display a decreased level with aging, PPAR activity being associated with rising levels of inflammatory mediators during aging [24,25]. Other pathways positively associated with MLS include apoptosis, cell adhesion molecules, dorso-ventral axis formation, ErbB signaling pathway and phototransduction.

Some of these have been indirectly linked to health previously; for example, a decreased expression of ErbB signaling in humans is associated with neurodegenerative diseases [26]. This is in agreement with our results, which indicate that increased ErbB signaling is associated with increasing mammalian MLS.

Overall, the linear models in our study emphasize the transcriptomic differences that correlate most with mammalian MLS. The results presented above are generally in line with the findings presented by other cross-species studies, both based on gene expression, but also on metabolomics and lipidomics. In addition to this, we suggest that several pathways, which have been relatively less studied with regard to cross-species lifespan variation, might also play important roles in longevity: PPAR signaling, glutathione metabolism and ErbB signaling. It is important to note, however, that those linear models detect statistical associations that are not necessarily causal for increased longevity. First of all, known or unknown confounding variables could be responsible for the association of expression with MLS. Even if the expression is directly associated to lifespan (without any confounding elements), the results do not allow us to detect whether a pathway is associated with longevity because their components contribute biologically to the increased lifespan (making them "pro-longevity expression traits"), or whether it is associated with MLS due to a deteriorating activity that occurs with aging, and for which longer MLS means longer deterioration (making them "deterioration markers of extended lifespans").

Nevertheless, the detected pathways highlight biological processes whose activities change significantly across the spectrum of mammalian MLS, and which warrant further study in relation to longevity.

SHAP Explanations for Universal Gene Expression Patterns

To also investigate the potentially non-linear patterns of association existing between gene expression and lifespan, we further used an interpretable machine learning approach. Briefly, we applied a gradient boosting decision tree algorithm, using LightGBM [27], to select genes associated with MLS. We then applied SHAP (Shapley additive explanations), a game-theory approach that can be used to explain the output of machine learning models [28], to the LightGBM model, both as part of the selection process and as the main interpretation method.