Briefly, the key difference between LightGBM and its predecessors is mainly the higher accuracy and computational efficiency. LightGBM has proven (i) to be highly effective for tabular data; (ii) to be a highly explainable model, especially when combined with the SHAP framework; (iii) that it is not sensitive to correlations in the features of the dataset, which is expected for gene expression data; and (iv) that, in comparison to other models (such as neural networks and SVR), it is less prone to overfitting on wide (many features) and small (few samples) datasets.

LightGBM is a non-linear regression model that, once trained, can be used to derive the importance of the employed features (i.e., genes), in predicting the target variable (i.e., MLS), therefore providing means for feature ranking and feature selection. In order to minimize the possibility for selection results to occur by chance, a fold stratified crossvalidation procedure is applied and repeated multiple times. Only features selected in all the repeated models were considered further.

For a particular single prediction, i.e., a sample, a SHAP value for a particular feature (i.e., a gene) represents the impact (i.e., the contribution) of the feature on the model's predicted MLS within that sample. The SHAP value results from the difference between the prediction when the feature takes a certain value (i.e., the expression in a sample) and the prediction that would be made if the feature took a random value, the latter being an estimation of the average model prediction. One can get a measure of the global feature importance of a gene by aggregating the Shapley values for the gene across all the predictions (i.e., samples).

Initially, we generated the SHAP explanations for life-history traits without including gene-expression data, which showed the high influence of the mitochondrial DNA GC content and of the gestation period on determining MLS (see Supplementary Figure S1). This LightGBM-SHAP model reached a Huber loss = 2.19, MAE = 2.86, MSE = 28.28 and R 2 = 0.96 when predicting MLS, with other life-history traits being considered (maximum lifespan, body mass, temperature, metabolic rate, gestation period, and mitochondrial GC%). Of these features, mitochondrial DNA GC content and gestation period were the most impactful traits (Supplementary Figure S1a). This is consistent with previous findings: the gestation period has been linked to senescence [29] and mitochondrial DNA content has been associated with determination of MLS [16]. In addition, several SHAP interaction effects were observed when predicting MLS: between mitochondrial GC content and body mass, between mitochondrial GC content and gestation period, and between body mass and temperature (Supplementary Figure S1b), meaning that these traits conjointly influence MLS variation across species.

Next, we investigated the effects of various genes whose expression level has an impact on MLS and other life-history traits. For this purpose, we used a two-stage backward feature selection strategy (explained in detail in the methods section). When predicting MLS, the stage II LightGBM-SHAP model used the genes selected by the stage I models as input (155 genes To prioritize genes from the stage II model, we relied on SHAP feature importance (mean absolute contribution) as a way to evaluate the global importance of an individual gene in predicting MLS. That is, for each gene, we have computed the absolute value of SHAP for every gene expression sample, and subsequently, these values have been averaged to obtain the SHAP feature importance. In total, 57 genes that have a mean absolute contribution of more than 0.1 years on MLS prediction were identified. A SHAP summary plot for the top genes which are most predictive for MLS is provided in Figure 3. For many genes, the distribution of SHAP values appears to be skewed to the right (Figure 3a), i.e., the expression of these genes strongly impacts lifespan prediction, positively, in many samples, while most of the genes that impact it negatively are only slightly below zero.

In particular, the expressions of the most impactful genes, DYRK4 and NFKBIL1, make a very strong positive contribution (SHAP > +20 in added years) to the MLS prediction for the human samples, as seen in Figure 3b (right-most red trajectories) and Figure 3d (leftmost columns).

Out of the top 15 genes, 5 genes (DYRK4, NFKBIL1, TRAPPC2L, ETV2, CHCHD3) had a significant mean absolute impact (more than 1 year) on the model's MLS prediction. Moreover, two of these five genes have been previously linked to aging: NFKBIL1 is involved in multiple methylation aging clocks [30], and has been associated with accelerated aging and cellular senescence in studies with genetically engineered mice [31], while CHCHD3 participates in the cross-talk between mitochondrial fusion and the hippo pathway in controlling cell proliferation (apoptosis) [32], which were both found to be involved in longevity in C. elegans [33]. STAG3 is essential for maintaining centromere chromatid cohesion and is required for DNA repair and synapsis between homologous chromosomes [34]. It is also known that DYRK4 has different roles in short-and long-living animals. In particular, mouse isoforms of DYRK4 are shorter and expressed mostly in the testis, while human isoforms are longer, expressed in many organs, and differ in localization and substrate specificity [35]. Despite the associations of many DYRKs family genes with neuronal development, Down syndrome, and age-related neurodegenerative diseases [36], DYRK4 still remains understudied in relation to longevity.

Besides correlating with MLS, our analysis has shown that these five genes are also predictive for other life-history traits, in particular, DYRK4 and NFKBIL1 are predictive for body mass, DYRK4 and ETV2 for gestation days, TRAPPC2L for mtGC, and NFKBIL1 with CHCHD3 for metabolic rate. To our knowledge, there is no information about the links between TRAPPC2L, ETV2, and aging; however, based on the SHAP analysis, it could be suggested that they might be novel candidates as longevity regulators and should be further investigated. Out of the top 15 genes, 5 genes (DYRK4, NFKBIL1, TRAPPC2L, ETV2, CHCHD3) had a significant mean absolute impact (more than 1 year) on the model's MLS prediction. Calculating the correlation between SHAP values corresponding to gene expression levels, relative to the baseline value (21.6 years; the estimated value obtained if all genes are used), allows for estimating the correlation of the target (i.e., MLS) with the feature (i.e., gene expression), by isolating the effects of other features (genes) on the target. By computing the Kendall tau-b ranked correlation coefficient (further denoted as Kendall tau), we classified the selected genes with regard to their positive or negative impact on the model prediction (further referred to as pro-MLS and anti-MLS, respectively).

NEIL1, NOXRED1, CALCOCO2, CEL, C1orf56 and LRR1 are the strongest pro-MLS genes (Kendall tau ≥ 0.6) and C6orf89, PPP1CA, DNAJC15, DPP9 and VARS2 are the strongest anti-MLS genes (Kendall tau ≤ −0.6). Of note, the impact direction of the pro-and anti-MLS genes resulting from the LightGBM-SHAP models generally coincides with the ones computed by organspecific linear models. From the 57 genes selected by the stage II LightGBM-SHAP model, 37 (65%) are found to be significantly associated with MLS (FDR < 0.05, R 2 > 0.3) by the linear models in at least one organ. The pro-/anti-longevity direction computed as the sign of Kendall tau in LightGBM-SHAP coincides for all 37 genes with the sign of the regression slope in the linear models (additionally, the direction is in concordance for significant results in more than one organ, as well). The strongest pro-MLS gene, CALCOCO2, had a positive Kendall tau of 0.72 in the LightGBM-SHAP model and was also selected as a pro-MLS gene by the linear models in the lung (R 2 = 0.56), brain (R 2 = 0.54), liver (R 2 = 0.53) and heart (R 2 = 0.39), while the C6orf89 gene that had a negative Kendall tau of -0.79 was selected as anti-MLS by linear models in the heart (R 2 = 0.61) and liver (R 2 = 0.40).

The C6orf89 gene is linked to the NF-κB system [37], whose overactivation is harmful to humans, through a series of age-related processes such as a chronic inflammatory response, increases in apoptotic resistance, a decline in autophagic cleansing, and tissue atrophy [38]. The negative role of PPP1CA in aging has also been recorded, as for instance, it has been found in mice that it plays a role in cognitive aging and its overexpression in cardiac cells resulted in premature heart failure [39].

Interactions between MLS

Associated Genes