Altered Brain Functional Hubs and Connectivity in Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus Patients: A Resting-State fMRI Study March 2018

Nicola Canessa Robi Tacutu Jiuquan Zhang Jian Wang wangjian_811@yahoo.com Liu D Duan S Zhou C Wei P Chen L Yin X Zhang J Wang J Daihong Liu † Shanshan Duan † Chaoyang Zhou Department of Radiology, Southwest Hospital Third Military Medical University (Army Medical University) ChongqingChina

Ping Wei Department of Radiology, Southwest Hospital Third Military Medical University (Army Medical University) ChongqingChina

Lihua Chen Department of Radiology, Southwest Hospital Third Military Medical University (Army Medical University) ChongqingChina

Xuntao Yin Department of Radiology, Southwest Hospital Third Military Medical University (Army Medical University) ChongqingChina

Jiuquan Zhang Department of Radiology, Southwest Hospital Third Military Medical University (Army Medical University) ChongqingChina

Jian Wang Department of Radiology, Southwest Hospital Third Military Medical University (Army Medical University) ChongqingChina

Department of Endocrinology The Third Affiliation Hospital of Chongqing Medical University ChongqingChina

Department of Endocrinology, Southwest Hospital Third Military Medical University (Army Medical University) ChongqingChina

Istituto Universitario di Studi Superiori di Pavia (IUSS) Institute of Biochemistry of the Romanian Academy Arie Budovsky, Judea R & D Center Italy, Romania, Israel

Altered Brain Functional Hubs and Connectivity in Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus Patients: A Resting-State fMRI Study

Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 155March 201810.3389/fnagi.2018.00055Received: 19 June 2017 Accepted: 19 February 2018 Published: 06 March 2018 Citation:ORIGINAL RESEARCH Edited by: Vadim Fraifeld, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Israel Reviewed by: *Correspondence: † These authors have contributed equally to this work. Altered Brain Functional Hubs and Connectivity in Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus Patients: A Resting-State fMRI Study. Front. Aging Neurosci. 10:55. Liu et al.

Altered Brain Network in T2DMtype 2 diabetes mellitus, resting-state functional MRI, degree centrality, Granger causality analysis, functional connectivity, cognitive impairment Abbreviations: ACG, anterior cingulate gyrusAVLT, Auditory Verbal Learning TestBMI, body mass indexDC, degree centralityDST, Digit Span TestEPI, echo planar imagingFC, functional connectivityFLAIR, fluid-attenuated inversion recoveryfMRI, functional magnetic resonance imagingFT3, free triiodothyronineFT4, free thyroxineGCA, Granger causality analysisHAMD, Hamilton Depression Rating ScaleHbA 1c , glycosylated hemoglobinHC, healthy controlHDL, high-density lipoproteinHOMA2-IR, updated homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistanceLDL, low-density lipoproteinLOC, lateral occipital corticesMMSE, Mini-Mental State ExaminationMNI, Montreal Neurological InstituteMoCA, Montreal Cognitive AssessmentMP-RAGE, magnetization prepared by rapid-acquisition gradient-echoPreCG, precentral gyrusROI, region of interestT2DM, Type 2 diabetes mellitusTMT, Trail Making TestTSH, thyroid-stimulating hormoneVFT, Verbal Fluency Test Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) affects a vast population and is closely associated with cognitive impairment. However, the mechanisms of cognitive impairment in T2DM patients have not been unraveled. Research on the basic units (nodes or hubs and edges) of the brain functional network on the basis of neuroimaging may advance our understanding of the network change pattern in T2DM patients.

This study investigated the change patterns of brain functional hubs using degree centrality (DC) analysis and the connectivity among these hubs using functional connectivity and Granger causality analysis. Compared to healthy controls, the DC values were higher in the left anterior cingulate gyrus (ACG) and lower in the bilateral lateral occipital cortices (LOC) and right precentral gyrus (PreCG) in T2DM patients. The functional connectivity between the left ACG and the right PreCG was stronger in T2DM patients, whereas the functional connectivity among the right PreCG and bilateral LOC was weaker. A negative causal effect from the left ACG to left LOC and a positive effect from the left ACG to right LOC were observed in T2DM patients, while in healthy controls, the opposite occurred. Additionally, the reserve of normal brain function in T2DM patients was negatively associated with the elevated glycemic parameters. This study demonstrates that there are brain functional hubs and connectivity alterations that may reflect the aberrant information communication in the brain of T2DM patients. The findings may advance our understanding of the mechanisms of T2DM-related cognitive impairment.

Abbreviations: ACG, anterior cingulate gyrus; AVLT, Auditory Verbal Learning Test; BMI, body mass index; DC, degree centrality; DST, Digit Span Test; EPI, echo planar imaging; FC, functional connectivity; FLAIR, fluid-attenuated inversion recovery; fMRI, functional magnetic resonance imaging; FT3, free triiodothyronine; FT4, free thyroxine; GCA, Granger causality analysis; HAMD, Hamilton Depression Rating Scale; HbA 1c , glycosylated hemoglobin; HC, healthy control; HDL, high-density lipoprotein; HOMA2-IR, updated homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance; LDL, low-density lipoprotein; LOC, lateral occipital cortices; MMSE, Mini-Mental State Examination; MNI, Montreal Neurological Institute; MoCA, Montreal Cognitive Assessment; MP-RAGE, magnetization prepared by rapid-acquisition gradient-echo; PreCG, precentral gyrus; ROI, region of interest; T2DM, Type 2 diabetes mellitus; TMT, Trail Making Test; TSH, thyroid-stimulating hormone; VFT, Verbal Fluency Test.

INTRODUCTION

Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) affects 415 million individuals and is predicted to increase to 642 million in 2040, according to the Diabetes Atlas 7th Edition published by the International Diabetes Federation (http://www.idf.org/about-diabetes/factsfigures). Numerous studies have suggested that T2DM is closely associated with cognitive impairment, including the domains of motor function, executive function, processing speed and memory (Palta et al., 2014). Clarification of the underlying mechanism of cognitive impairment in T2DM patients for diagnosis and therapeutic effect estimation is essential before these patients develop dementia.

As a proven informative neuroimaging method, functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) has been extensively applied to investigate alterations of brain function in T2DM patients. In fMRI studies, T2DM patients manifest functional changes in certain brain regions, and these changes are different from those associated with normal aging. For instance, the abnormal amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation, regional homogeneity, and functional connectivity (FC) in T2DM patients have been associated with poor performance in cognitive tests (Xia et al., 2013;Chen et al., 2014;Cui et al., 2014Cui et al., , 2015Moheet et al., 2015). These studies have focused on local spontaneous brain activity or have analyzed the FC or network within the selected brain regions based on a priori assumption. According to the graph theory, a network is defined as a set of pairwise relationships between the elements of a system, which formally consists of a set of edges that link a set of nodes (Barabasi and Oltvai, 2004;Petersen and Sporns, 2015). Network analysis offers a new conceptual framework to investigate the network biology of aging (Wolfson et al., 2009;Tacutu et al., 2011), T2DM (Sandor et al., 2017) and neurodegenerative diseases (de Haan et al., 2017) at a variety of levels of scale including genes, proteins, synapses, neurons, neuronal circuits, neuronal populations, and systems (Petersen and Sporns, 2015).

Therefore, the aforementioned fMRI findings provide a clue to explore T2DM-related brain dysfunction from the perspective of macroscopic nodes and connectivity at the whole brain level, which may share universal laws of network.

Degree centrality (DC), a measure based on graph theory, provides an approach for identifying the candidate functional hubs in the diabetic brain. DC is defined as the number of links that are strongly correlated to a given voxel or node for a binary graph and enables whole brain analysis at the voxel level, which may avoid the bias caused by selecting brain regions according to a priori assumption (Buckner et al., 2009;Zuo et al., 2012). It also considers the weights of these links for a weighted graph, and the weighted version of DC is more robust against confounding factors (Zuo et al., 2012). Thus, it can quantify the importance of a node to the rest of the brain, and nodes with high DC are defined as hubs (Zuo et al., 2012). Therefore, DC enables an investigation of the complexity and patterns of the brain functional connectome in diseases, including the subsequent analysis of FC between the hubs and the rest of the brain (Cui et al., 2016), or the interactions among these functional hubs in the present study.