A gene may impact longevity not only by itself, but also by cooperation with other genes. Based on the cumulative knowledge of interactions between longevity-associated genes (LAGs), it has been previously shown that genes that have a role in determining average or maximum lifespan (as LAGs for example) may have a variety of combined effects-synergistic, additive, dependent, or antagonistic [40]. Thus, the total lifespan changes as a result of genetic interventions targeting two genes are usually not the simple sum of their impacts. To estimate the two-way interactions of the genes selected as potential MLS-associated genes, we also computed SHAP interaction values. The SHAP interaction value of two genes on a sample is the contribution to the prediction of the combined genes after accounting for the contributions of the individual two genes. The matrix shows the strength of interactions, by plotting the difference between the combined SHAP value of a gene pair and the sum of their individual SHAP values effects (depicted by the color intensity in Figure 3c). The results showed that each pair of genes has different effects on MLS prediction. As is shown in Figure 3c, the following gene pairs might have a strong interaction: DYRK4 and NFKBIL1, DYRK4 and RNH1, STAG3 and RNH1, and also TRAPPC2L and ETV2.

We explored the gene pairs with the highest magnitude of interaction (Supplementary Figure S2). DYRK4 is a top gene in terms of overall positive MLS impact; however, when NFKBIL1 is highly expressed, DYRK4 increases MLS to a lower extent (Supplementary Figure S2a). RNH1 (ribonuclease/angiogenin inhibitor 1) is a gene with a high number of interactions. RNH1 is a known regulator of vascularization and a mediator of oxidative stress, which has antioxidant [41] and redox homeostatic [41] effects. As can be seen in the SHAP feature dependency plots, RNH1 has very similar nonlinear interactions with both CAPN3 (Supplementary Figure S2b), DYRK4 (Supplementary Figure S2c), and STAG3 (Supplementary Figure S2d). In all three pairs, the high expression of CAPN3, DYRK4, and STAG3 increases the magnitude of RNH1's MLS impact in both positive and negative directions, while their low expression values keep the RNH1 impact close to zero.

Bayesian Networks

In this section, a Bayesian networks approach was used to identify genes that have the potential to be causally associated with MLS while accounting for redundancy and spuriousness. In this context, the potentially causal association of any pair of variables (i.e., gene expression values) was defined as being asserted whenever the correlation between the two holds, regardless of the values others could take (i.e., whenever the two variables do not display conditional independence) [42].

For this, first we constructed a Bayesian network, using the genes included in this study and MLS. We employed the notion of a Markov blanket to identify genes that might be causally linked to MLS-the Markov blanket of MLS is the set of genes that are parents, children, or parents of children of the MLS node in the Bayesian network. By definition, the variability in the genes from the Markov blanket of MLS will contain all the useful information about MLS. Subsequently, "potentially causal" gene signatures were defined as gene subsets of the Market blanket of MLS. Implementation-wise, gene signatures were found with SES, a constrained-based variable selection algorithm [43].

While the above-mentioned approach does not fully guarantee causality, it allows a data-driven exploratory analysis to identify valid causal inferences under strict assumptions. In order to give a causal interpretation in an absolute sense, three assumptions would have to hold: the causal Markov assumption, faithfulness, and causal sufficiency [44]. Unfortunately, with only transcriptomics data, which do not include all possible confounders, completely proving causality is not practically achievable, and the employed algorithm deals with these assumptions as best as possible (by construction, the causal Markov condition holds, and using several stratified partitions, the dataset's underlying conditional independence structure could be approximated, thus attaining faithfulness). Even if causal sufficiency cannot be proven, the results obtained with this method still provide important information about the conditional independence structure between genes and MLS [45].

The Bayesian network analysis included 50 iterations, each corresponding to one stratified train-validation partition, resulting in a set of 50 gene signatures (see Supplementary  Table S4 and Figure S3; for methodological details, please see Material and Methods). Supplementary Table S5 shows the relative frequency associated with each gene, representing the proportion of times it was included as part of a signature (i.e., when its p-value < 0.01) from the set of all signatures (50). The relative frequencies can be used to rank and therefore prioritize genes with respect to potential causal relations with MLS. Considering all 50 signatures, the most robustly/frequently included genes were the following: NOXA1, C6orf89, NEU2, NDUFA6, RBM46, KCNMB3, and CEL, with relative frequencies of 1.00, 0.94, 0.94, 0.90, 0.82, 0.72, and 0.60, respectively (Supplementary Table S5).

From a biological point of view, the obtained results are in line with those from the previous section, as NOXA1, C6orf89, and CEL were also identified to be important for MLS determination by LightGBM-SHAP. Additionally, it has been shown that NEU2 upregulation triggers myoblast differentiation in C2C12 cells, and since it is involved in the growth and differentiation of satellite cells, it might implicate the regenerative capabilities of organs such as muscle or heart [46]. NDUFA6 is a key component in Complex I [47,48], which was found to be a biomarker of aging in mice [49] and is downregulated with age in humans [47]. RBM46 might be indirectly linked to aging through its role in the degradation of β-Catenin mRNA in mice [50], and thus through proteasomal degradation in the Wnt/β-signaling pathways. Finally, KCNMB3 has been found to be important for insulin signaling and β-cell function [51]. Taking these genes together and performing a network-based enrichment analysis, it appears that their most enriched biological functions are mitochondria-related, such as the NADH dehydrogenase complex, mitochondrial respiratory chain, mitochondrial organization, and mitochondrial metabolism disease.

Integration of Linear, LightGBM-SHAP, and Bayesian Networks Models

To find the overlaps between the genes predicted by the models employed in this study, we compared the most predictive genes from SHAP explanations, Bayesian networks, and organ-based linear models.

Joint Predictions in Linear and LightGBM-SHAP Models

In most cases, the positive and negative predictive impact of the genes was shared between LightGBM-SHAP (pro-and anti-MLS genes) and linear organ-based models (positively and negatively correlated genes). The pro-MLS genes NOXA1, KCNMB3, CEL, CALCOCO2, LRR1, CAPN3, HRH4, C1orf56 and FIGNL1, which were selected by LightGBM-SHAP, were also selected for different organs by linear models (Supplementary Table S6). Of note, CALCOCO2 and LRR1 have been selected by linear models in all of the organs, hinting that they might be universal determinants. CALCOCO2 (also known as NDP52) is involved in innate immunity and autophagy, which declines with age [52], while Leucine-rich repeat protein 1 (LRR-1) is known to be a determinant of genome stability [53,54]. It is known that FIGNL1 is related to homologous DNA repair [55], HRH4 encodes a histamine receptor that is predominantly expressed in hematopoietic cells and is known to be associated with age-related macular degeneration [56], and KCNMB3 is important for insulin signaling and β-cell function, but its association with glucose-related traits is still unclear [51]. The CAPN3 gene is a major intracellular protease, and some in silico associations with aging exist [57]. NOXA1 is an enhancer for NADPH, which is one of the major reactive oxygen species sources [58], while C1orf56 and CEL are potentially novel LAGs.

Several anti-MLS genes in the SHAP analysis were also selected in the linear models, including C6orf89 and DPP9 (Supplementary Table S6). With regards to their functions, it has been shown that C6orf89 exhibits histone deacetylase (HDAC) enhancer properties [59], while DPP9 regulates mitochondrial protein levels and localization [60], and is linked to a variety of age-related pathologies including type 2 diabetes, obesity and cancer.

Joint Predictions in Bayesian and LightGBM-SHAP Models

Genes selected by the Bayesian networks model (the relative frequencies of genes that were part of gene-signatures are provided in the Supplementary Table S5) had high absolute Kendall tau values and were also selected by linear models in some of the organs. At the same time, these genes (NOXA1, C6orf89, NEU2, NDUFA6, RBM46, KCNMB3, and CEL) were not the most impactful in terms of mean absolute SHAP values. However, out of them CEL and KCNMB3 belong to the top 10 most impactful genes in terms of SHAP values.

Joint Predictions in All Three Models

Among the genes selected by all models, some strongly correlated with life-history traits and mitochondrial GC content. In particular, the SHAP values of NOXA1 (mitochondriaassociated gene) and KCNMB3 strongly and positively correlate with both mitochondrial GC content (NOXA1 Kendall tau = 0.65; KCNMB3 Kendall tau = 0.62) and gestation period (NOXA1 Kendall tau = 0.62; KCNMB3 Kendall tau = 0.64). We also observed a positive association between C1orf56 and mitochondrial GC content (Kendall tau = 0.6189), and between FIGNL1 and gestation period (Kendall tau = 0.41), as well as a negative association between C6orf89 and metabolic rate (Kendall tau = −0.57) (Supplementary Table S6).

Composite Ranking