The vast majority of LAGs were discovered by downregulating gene activity (e.g., knockout and RNAi). For example, in C. elegans, only 52 of hundreds of LAGs were discovered by overexpression assays. This could potentially create a bias toward overestimation of certain categories for longevity regulation on the expanse of others. A good illustration of that point is that the 'stress response' category was noticeably absent from the enrichment analysis. Yet, it could be expected that many stress response genes would extend lifespan when upregulated rather than downregulated (Moskalev et al., 2014). Indeed, our analysis shows that overexpression of LAGs listed in the GO database as stress response genes (n = 81; Table S7) almost exclusively (95%) resulted in lifespan extension (Fig. 4). Of these LAGs, 19 were also tested by knockout or knockdown experiments. Remarkably, in 18 cases, this resulted in lifespan reduction and only in the case of Sirtuin-1 in yeast-in lifespan extension. Apart from the longevity value of stress response genes, these observations clearly demonstrate the importance of overexpression experiments in longevity studies.

Concordancy and discordancy in lifespan-modulating genetic interventions

Considering the conservation of many LAGs over a broad evolutionary distance, a valid question is whether modulating a given LAG in different species has a similar impact on longevity, that is, lifespan extension or  Fig. 4 Percentage of manipulations on stress response LAGs that extended the lifespan. Only LAGs which were termed as 'stress response' under the GO classification system are included. Depicted is the percentage of overexpression (black) and knockout/knockdown (gray) interventions that resulted in lifespan extension. All intraspecies differences between the effects of overexpression and knockout/knockdown on lifespan were significant (P < 0.001). The full list of stress response LAGs is available in Table S7.

Longevity genes and interventions, H. Yanai et al. 1271

reduction. This was previously addressed for worm and yeast, where the genetic component of lifespan determination was found to be significantly conserved (Smith et al., 2008). Here, we broadened the question to all available model organisms. Namely, we compared all orthologs which were shown to have an impact on longevity in more than one species. Overall, we found that approximately 10% of LAGs' orthologs (n = 184) were identified as such in at least two model organisms; 36 LAGs' orthologs were identified in three and 20 in four model organisms. The number of concordant effects was significantly higher than the discordant ones (P < 0.003). That is, manipulation of LAGs has, more than often, the same effect in different species (Fig. 5, Table S8). Unfortunately, a substantial portion of the genetic interventions in yeast and worms could not be clearly defined as concordant or discordant with other model organisms (Fig. 5a, white), mostly due to a major difference in methods and evaluation criteria (Tacutu et al., 2013). When looking at pairwise comparisons (Fig. 5b), it is evident that the level of concordancy is very high for some pairs of species (for example, M. musculus and D. melanogaster) and lower for others (for example, M. musculus and C. elegans).

In order to discern what could bring about this difference, we calculated a conservation index for each pair of orthologs (as previously described by Huang et al., 2004) and compared the results to the concordancy/discordancy of the effects. As seen in Fig. S4, the observed discordancy could not be explained by sequence dissimilarity. One of the possible explanations for the observed discordancy is that in these cases orthologous LAGs were discovered by interventions which greatly differ from one another (e.g., knockout and Fig. 5 Concordancy in LAG manipulations across model organisms. Concordancy was determined according to the classification of LAGs as pro-or anti-longevity genes (Tacutu et al., 2013). That is, if a given LAG was determined as a pro-or anti-longevity gene in two or more species, it was termed 'concordant'; otherwise, it was termed 'discordant'. A detailed table is available in Table S8. (a) Summary of the concordancy for LAGs from each model species which have also been tested in two or more species (interspecies). (b) Venn diagram of the concordancy between species. (c+d) Summary of the concordancy of LAG manipulations within the same species (intraspecies).

Longevity genes and interventions, H. Yanai et al. overexpression). As such, if a given LAG is knocked out and as a result the animal ages more rapidly, that LAG is defined as a 'pro-longevity' gene; however, an overexpression of the same LAG will not necessarily increase lifespan. For example, a knockout of G protein, alpha subunit (gpa-9) in C. elegans increases maximum lifespan by up to 50%, but paradoxically, its overexpression also increases the worm maximum lifespan (by 20%) (Schneider & Cuervo, 2014). If such a difference can occur in the same species, more so could be expected when testing for effects on lifespan between different model organisms. Indeed, as is evident from Fig. S5, the concordancy increased significantly (from 73% to 88%) when a similar intervention was performed. Then, at least some of the discordancy could be explained by a variety in the methods of intervention. It should however be noted that the vast majority of intraspecies comparisons of opposite interventions have brought about concordant effects (Fig. 5c), so that we cannot rule out interspecies differences that caused some of the inconsistencies.

Interestingly, only five LAGs (Sod2, Sirt1, Mtor, Fxn, and Rps6 kb1; in total, 20 orthologs) were tested for their impact on longevity in all four model species. The manipulations of these genes showed a predominantly concordant effect on longevity, with the exception of Fxn (Frh-1) which has an opposite effect only in C. elegans (Table S7). Altogether, the results indicate a clear trend of concordancy in the effects of LAG manipulations across model species despite a high evolutionary distance between them. The much smaller portion of discordant cases could be attributed to either technical or biological issues, or both.

Discussion

Our wide-scale analysis of longevity-associated genes (LAGs) shows that their orthologs are consistently overrepresented across diverse taxa, compared with the orthologs of other genes, and this conservation was relatively independent of evolutionary distance (Figs 1-3). The high evolutionary conservation was evident for LAGs discovered in all of the four major model organisms (yeast, S. cerevisae; worm, C. elegans; fly, D. melanogaster; mouse, M. musculus), but was especially relevant for C. elegans, where a large portion of LAGs were identified by genome-wide screens, thus minimizing potential biases. Moreover, many worm LAGs were discovered by postdevelopmental RNAi on genes essential for growth and development, and this predominantly resulted in lifespan extension (Curran & Ruvkun, 2007;Tacutu et al., 2012). That is, postdevelopmental suppression of genes that are vital early in life but are detrimental later in life, can be beneficial for longevity. The orthologs of these LAGs are also highly overrepresented across diverse taxa. Altogether, the C. elegans analysis suggests that antagonistic pleiotropy might be a highly conserved principle of aging.

As one of Niven's laws states: 'It is easier to destroy than to create'. Indeed, there are many more ways to make an organism live shorter than to make it live longer. The enrichment analysis demonstrated the difference in public and private pathways/categories, with potential importance for lifespan extension or development of an early aging phenotype (Table 1). It is worthwhile to note that while the enrichment analysis definitely highlights the importance of the overrepresented categories, it does not exclude the importance of nonenriched ones. For example, a well-recognized longevity pathway, insulin/IGF signaling, does not appear as an enriched pathway in our analysis but has been previously shown to be a public mechanism of aging (Piper et al., 2008). Another important category that did not fall into the enriched ones is stress response genes. Stress resistance has long been linked to longevity in many animal models (Johnson et al., 2002;Moskalev et al., 2014). In this study, we have specifically addressed stress response genes and showed that their overexpression mostly results in lifespan extension (Fig. 4). This further emphasizes the importance of overexpression interventions in longevity studies, which should be a point for future investigations. The latter would not only drive the discovery of new longevity regulators but could also strengthen the validity of LAGs that were discovered by knockout or knockdown experiments, as we have shown in this study (Fig. 5c).

The recent development of novel CRISPRbased gene activation technologies could provide a strong platform and push toward this approach.